Date: Mon, 4 Jan 1999 21:41:14 GMT
From: Paul Taylor <pt@dcs.qmw.ac.uk>
Subject: categories: An Abstract Stone Duality

On 29 June 1997, I announced on "categories" my "Euclidean principle"
	f(a) & a = f(true) & a
which holds for any support classifier or dominance Sigma (ie subobject
classifier as in an elementary topos, but for any class of monos, eg open
or RE subsets), where a:X->Sigma and f:X x Sigma -> Sigma.  I gave a 
talk about this at the Category Theory meeting in Vancouver that year.

At the Category Theory meeting in Tours in 1994 I talked about taking
Par\'e's theorem (that the contravariant powerset functor in a topos,
which is self-adjoint, is monadic) as an axiom.  Another category with
this property is the category of locally compact locales, where Sigma is
the Sierpinski space and "powerset" means "lattice of open sets", equipped
with the Scott topology.

This is a way of re-axiomatising general topology without the arbitrary
unions in the traditional definition and in locale theory: the category
of "frames" is to be both dual to the category of "spaces" and algebraic
over it.

I have now written up these ideas as a draft paper entitled
    "An Abstract Stone Duality, I: Geometric and Higher Order Logic"
that you can get via my page in the Hypatia Electronic Library, which is
	http://hypatia.dcs.qmw.ac.uk/author/TaylorP
(I sent copies of an earlier draft to a number of people in November 1998,
but otherwise this is new text: it is not the same as any "notes on SDT"
that you may have got from me over the web in the past.)

After some discussion relating the monadic property to sobriety of spaces
and spatiality of locales, I prove the converse of the basic observation
about the Euclidean principle: if Sigma satisfies it and the adjunction
is monadic then Sigma is the classifier for some class of monos.

It is neither an axiom nor a theorem that the category has all finite limits.
Indeed, the point is that equalisers etc depend on a notion of equality,
which, from a computational point of view, is not as straightforward as
pure mathematicians have traditionally considered it to be.  Some spaces
(datatypes) admit equality in a "positive" way: for example in a group
given by generators and relations, or in a lambda calculus with reduction
rules, we may hope to prove equality of two terms, but not inequality.
On the other hand, we may hope to prove inequality of real numbers but
not equality.  These ideas are formalised by notions of "discrete" and
"Hausdorff" spaces respectively, along with definitions of "open" and
"compact".

We show that the full subcategory of open discrete spaces is a pretopos,
the same being true of the compact Hausdorff spaces, by showing that the
coequaliser is Sigma-split.

The point of Sigma-split co/equalisers is that, being equationally defined,
we might hope to be able to compute with them, possibly using something
like the "continuation-passing style" used in some compilers.

The Euclidean principle and monadicity property are related, respectively,
to the Phoa principle and repleteness in sythetic domain theory.  In that
subject we also need an infinitary axiom that makes all functions Scott
continuous and provides fixed points; this axiom is *not* discussed in
the present paper, largely because this seemed an appropriate criterion
to use to divide up a rambling collection of notes into papers.  The
infinitary axiom and the construction of the "lift" will be considered 
in Part II.

Under the infinitary axiom, open discrete spaces form an arithmetic universe,
ie they admit N-indexed colimits and free algebras, whilst compact Hausdorff
space admit limits and cofree coalgebras.

You might like to consider this paper alongside the recent work of Alex
Simpson and Jaap van Oosten on Synthetic Domain Theory,
	http://www.math.uu.nl/publications/preprints/1080.ps.gz
which is very much concerned with the infinitary axiom.  In particular
Alex is keen to emphasise the additional completeness of the ambient
category that is needed to construct infinitary co/limits and solutions
of domain equations, by comparison with directed joins and fixed points
of functions.  He considers that some attention to the axiom of replacement
is needed here, and I agree with him, though our treatments are different.

My paper is written for a general mathematical audience, and argues its
point of view from a position of extreme Cartesisn doubt.  I feel that
Alex and Jaap's work is very arcane by comparison, as it depends heavily
on Hyland's effective topos.

For my own views on replacement, see the final section of my book,
	Practical Foundations of Mathematics.
I hope to be able to make an announcement about the availability of 
this very soon.


Date: Wed, 6 Jan 1999 12:35:26 +0100 (MET)
From: Jaap van Oosten <jvoosten@math.uu.nl>
Subject: categories: re: An Abstract Stone Duality

This is a reaction to Paul Taylor's advertisement for his paper
on Abstract Stone Duality.

Paul has considered appropriate to mention the paper "Axioms and
(Counter)examples in Synthetic Domain Theory" by Alex Simpson and
myself, and to polemicize against it in the following way:
  
> You might like to consider this paper alongside the recent work of Alex
> Simpson and Jaap van Oosten on Synthetic Domain Theory,
> 	http://www.math.uu.nl/publications/preprints/1080.ps.gz
> which is very much concerned with the infinitary axiom.  In particular
> Alex is keen to emphasise the additional completeness of the ambient
> category that is needed to construct infinitary co/limits and solutions
> of domain equations, by comparison with directed joins and fixed points
> of functions.  He considers that some attention to the axiom of replacement
> is needed here, and I agree with him, though our treatments are different.
> 
> My paper is written for a general mathematical audience, and argues its
> point of view from a position of extreme Cartesisn doubt.  I feel that
> Alex and Jaap's work is very arcane by comparison, as it depends heavily
> on Hyland's effective topos.

Thanks, Paul, for mentioning our paper, but since the above text is a
blatant misrepresentation of its content, a correction is in order.
Our paper develops the theory on the basis of 4 axioms, of which one
(the \neg\neg-separatedness of \Sigma) is rather special, as we explicitly
acknowledge. Otherwise the treatment is completely general, and "completeness
of the ambient category" nowhere enters the picture (we do have, however,
some treatment of whether the lift functor preserves internal colimits of
chains). The remark about Replacement refers to other work by Alex. 

The axiomatic treatment raises independence questions, some of which we solve
by considering models. One of these models is the effective topos. Nowhere
do we hint that the effective topos should have a privileged place among
models.

Anyway, it is funny that our work, which builds on the tradition of turning
SDT into an axiomatic theory (a process which I think is still unfinished),
tradition which was started by Pino Rosolini, Wesley Phoa, Martin Hyland and
Paul himself, is now found to be "arcane" (mind you, the whole subject is
less than twenty years old) by Paul.

Jaap van Oosten


Date: Wed, 6 Jan 1999 17:52:25 GMT
From: Paul Taylor <pt@dcs.qmw.ac.uk>
Subject: categories: Synthetic Domain Theory

As Jaap van Oosten says, I considered appropriate to mention the paper
"Axioms and (Counter)examples in Synthetic Domain Theory" by Alex Simpson
and himself when I announced my own draft paper "An Absract Stone Duality".

There are two reasons why I did consider this appropriate:
(1) they and I both use the heading "synthetic domain theory" for our
    work, and I feel that their work is important and should be considered
    alongside mine;
(2) people outside a particular discipline tend to go by the labels -
    "guilt by association" - so I was keen that those who had already
    looked at Jaap & Alex's paper (after they advertised it on "categories"
    before the holiday) should not assume that mine would be of the same kind.

I did not "polemicize" against it.  I said that I felt it was "arcane",
but wanted to say something positive about it first. Unfortunately, as
Alex has pointed out to me, I got the paper confused with our discussions
when I visited Edinburgh shortly before Jaap's announcement.

Jaap says that
> it is funny that our work, which builds on the tradition of turning
> SDT into an axiomatic theory (a process which I think is still unfinished),
> tradition which was started by Pino Rosolini, Wesley Phoa, Martin Hyland and
> Paul himself, is now found to be "arcane" (mind you, the whole subject is
> less than twenty years old) by Paul.

As a generality, and without wishing to take this argument any further,
surely a *founder* of a theory is qualified to describe a subsequent 
development of it as "arcane", ie accessible only to particular specialists,
and not what that founder had in mind?  SDT is a minority research topic,
still the plaything of a group of friends - that's what I like about it.
It's not Tony Blair's New Labour Party - we *are* allowed to disagree!

Anyway, since this particular beast has now been awoken from its slumbers,
I want to try to explain the mathematical content of this disagreement
briefly for a general audience.

Probably most "categories" readers have now heard the slogan,
	"Domains are sets - all functions are computable"
cf	"Manifolds are sets - all functions are smooth".
Synthetic domain theory and synthetic differential geometry are then about
(1) postulating conditions on the ambient topos (category of "sets")
(2) selecting from those "sets" those that are to be called "domains" or
    "manifolds" and
(3) using these ideas to prove interesting theorems or compute programs.

Much of the progress and disagreement in SDT has been about part (2).

Wesley Phoa, in his 1990 Cambridge thesis under Martin Hyland's supervision,
was the first to describe objects in a certain topos that looked like the
"domains" in theoretical computer science, rather than like lattices in
pure mathematics. (I *don't* mean to polemicize against Pino Rosolini there.)
Wes defined a certain preorder on each object of the topos, and restricted
to those objects for which this is a poset (antisymmetric), and further
to those for which it has directed joins, a least element and therefore
fixed points.

In particular, Wes selected his domains by testing each one for the relevant
infinitary condition.

My idea, in my 1991 LiCS paper, was that the infinitary condition could be
imposed on a *single* object, and the domains selected be means of a more
finitary categorical notion called "repleteness" that Martin Hyland had
introduced in his paper in the 1990 Como Category Theory proceedings.

Alex Simpson, John Longley and Jaap van Oosten later came up with another
infinitary condition, "well-completeness", and they, like Wes, select their
domains by testing this for each domain.  Under suitable conditions, this
gives a larger full subcategory than mine.

I do not dare even to give you the definition of well-completeness, let
alone attempt to defend or attack it.  You should read Alex and Jaap's
paper for that.

One of the objections to repleteness is that it is very difficult to 
characterise in familiar models.  Pino Rosolini has (with others)
investigated this, and you can find some of his results in the papers 
listed on his Hypatia page,
	http://hypatia.dcs.qmw.ac.uk/author/RosoliniG

(By the way, Hypatia now has a new server and some new code.  The machine
on which it was living from May to December 1998 was forever crashing,
partly because the mirrored papers were stored on a large collection of 
very old disks with a SCSI chain that made visitors to our machine room 
gasp in horror.)

My paper is, in this context, a defence of the notion of repleteness.
Since "attack is the best form of defence" it does this by replacing it
with a stronger notion, namely that a certain adjunction be monadic.
This has the effect of replacing the "domains" defined by ordered structures
that have been in use in theoretical computer science since the early 1970s
by locally compact locales.

Paul

