Date: Fri, 17 Jul 1998 19:16:20 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@math.mcgill.ca>
Subject: categories: duality question: alg. topology

To all experts in algebraic topology:

Is the duality I describe below known?  It does not appear to be
Poincare duality since there is no separate treatment of the torsion and
torsion free parts.  Let S be a simplicial complex, that is a set of
faces of an N simplex closed under face operations.  For what I am about
to say, it is necessary that the empty face in dimension -1 be included
so that the (co-)homology will be reduced.  This means, for example,
that there is a distinction between the empty simplicial complex (which
has no homology) and the simplicial complex consisting of only the empty
set (which has one cyclic homology group in degree -1).  In fact, the
former is dual to the N simplex and the latter to the N sphere.

Let S' be defined as the set of complements of the complement of S.
That is, for each simplex sigma not in S, the complementary simplex,
whose vertices are those not in sigma, belongs to S' (and nothing else).
Then for i = -1,...,N, the ith homology of S is the N-i-1st cohomology
of S'.

The algebraic topology books I have looked at do not mention Poincare
duality, except for Lefschetz, written in 1940, and he uses a complex
different from S'; in fact just opposite poset to S, since he is doing
things in the generality of an arbitrary poset equipped with "incidence
numbers" that are used in defining the boundary operator.  In
particular, his dual has the same number of elements as S, rather than
2^{N+1} - that number.

One thing I find curious is that although this gives, essentially, the
cohomology of S, there is no obvious way of making that into a
contravariant functor.


Date: Sat, 18 Jul 1998 15:42:04 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@math.mcgill.ca>
Subject: categories: More algebraic topology

I have a real question now.  Suppose S is a simplicial complex of
dimension n with the property that every n-1 face of every n simplex is
a face of at least two n simplexes.  I want to conclude that H_n(S) is
non-zero.  Assume that the union of the n simplexes is connected (any
connected component would inherit the hypothesis).  Then it seems clear
geometrically that the union of the faces would enclose one or more
holes, but I don't see how to actually prove this.  The space would
appear to have no boundary, but it also is not a manifold since a point
in one of the faces could have a branched neighborhood.


Date: Sat, 18 Jul 1998 21:32:59 -0400 (EDT)
From: John R Isbell <ji2@ACSU.Buffalo.EDU>
Subject: categories: Re: More algebraic topology

Dear Mike,
   You are asking for every strongly connected (finite)
n-complex to have nonzero $H_n$, which I think you can
find -- if your Russian suffices -- in P. S. Alexandrov
Combinatorial Topology, OGIZ, 1947 (660 pp.) [MR 10,
55b]. It should be around Chapter 14 or 15. I have 
never tried to go that far in the book, nor to read the
Russian at all. I have long owned, and have used as
texts in classes, the English translations which go to
Chapter 12 I think; Graylock, Rochester, vol. 1, 1956
[MR 17, 882a] and vol. 2, 1957 [MR 19, 759a]. With any
luck you will strike an algebraic topologist who can
give you an English reference.
   Yours,  John


Date: Mon, 20 Jul 1998 07:44:05 -0400 (EDT)
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>
Subject: categories: 2 Barr questions

I've got well over a thousand e-mails waiting to be looked at. I'm
working on the pile from both ends. Two recent postings from Mike 
Barr:


1) The duality he describes sounds like Spanier-Whitehead duality.
It's usually defined geometrically. Embed a finite complex into a
higher-dimensional sphere, take the complement, contract it to a
finite complex. Do this in the stable-homotopy category (obtained by
forcing the suspension functor on the homotopy category to become an
automorphism) and normalize the dimensions so that the dual of a space
has the negative of its dimension. Show that the embeddings can be
chosen in a coherent fashion to obtain a self-duality for stable
homotopy. (The last step is non-trivial and the only person I know who
verified it is Frank Adams, and that wasn't published. Does anyone
have a citation?)


2) If every  n-1  cell of an n-dimensional finite complex is the face 
of _exactly_  2  n-dimensional cells then there's a fairly easy 
argument that the n-dimensional  Z_2 cohomology is non-trivial. But if 
the condition is changed to "_at least_  2  n-dimensional cells" then 
the space can be contractible.

Start with the closed unit disk in the complex plane and glue the 
boundary onto the closed unit interval (which constitutes half of the
intersection of the disk and the real line) by identifying  a point  x
on the interval with  e^(2(pi)xi)  on the boundary. If one 
triangulates this space, each edge will be a face of either 2 or 3
triangles. 

One way of seeing that this is contractible is to consider first the 
space obtained by identifying just the upper half of the boundary with
the unit interval by identifying  a point  x  on the interval with
e^((pi)xi)  on the boundary. Recalling that the homotopy type of a 
space is unchanged when reasonable closed contractible subsets are 
collapsed to points, note that if the lower half of the boundary is 
collapsed to a point we obtain the first space. On the other hand, the
upper half (together with the unit interval) is contractible, and when
it's collapsed to a point we obtain the unit disk.

By taking the suspension of this example we can get an example in 
every larger finite dimension.

This example is a mapping cone. Take the map from the circle to the
circle that wraps the first third of the circle around the circle,
wraps the second third around in the opposite direction, and the 
last third in the original direction. This map is, of course, 
homotopic to the identity map. The mapping-cone construction depends
only on the homotopy type of the map. The mapping cone of the
identity map on the circle is, of course, the disk.


Date: Mon, 20 Jul 1998 13:20:01 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@math.mcgill.ca>
Subject: categories: Answers

I got the same counter-example from Peter Johnstone and Peter Freyd.  PJ
called it the dunce cap and described it as a triangle with the three
edges identified, one in the reverse direction.  PF described it in a more
complicated way that made it easier to see it actually contractible.  And
the latter was really what I wanted to refute.  When I saw PJ's example, I
mistakenly thought it still had a 1-cycle.  

The smallest triangulation I found had 8 vertices, which is still too
large to compute by hand with.  The dual complex still has over 200
simplexes and that is just too many.  If anyone knows a smaller
triangulation, I would like to know it.  

Thanks to all who responded.

Michael


