Date: Sun, 2 Mar 1997 15:19:43 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Intuitionism's Limits 

Date: Sun, 2 Mar 1997 15:07:12 +1030 (CST)
From: William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au>

Intuitionism's Limits: if C is a category sufficiently complex to
demonstrate that some C-arrow f:a-->b is monic and B is a subcategory
of C containing just f (and the requisite identity arrows), do we
still know that f is monic? Should we? (Or, in other words, which
view *should* dominate: Intuitionism, Realism, the category
theoretic...?) What if C is something (semi?)fundamental like a
category of all sets and functions, or a category of categories?

I suppose the answer is that monicity is relative to a category,
but what supports this as a claim? And doesn't it seem to contradict
the reasonable realist claim that we can somehow know f in B to be
monic? (Or am I missing something straightforward: that properties
can be granted to f by its relationship to C via an inclusion functor?)

This goes to the issue of the adequacy of category theory as a foundation
in more than the simply technical sense.

(I could be using the term "realism" incorrectly too: I take it to be
a positon, in maths at least, that mathematical entities can
have collections of properties beyond the constraints of a given
theoretical context.)

William James


Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 10:36:38 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's Limits 

Date: Sun, 2 Mar 1997 15:52:17 -0500 (EST)
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>

To William James,

  You must be using a non-standard (philosophical?) definition of
"monic", since it is obvious using the standard (mathematical)
definition that a monic remains a monic in any subcategory containing
it (to get unnecessarily technical, because it's given by a
universally quantified Horn sentence). Could you tell us your
definition?

  (For the record: f: A -> B  is monic iff for all  x,x':X -> A  it 

                    x    f          x'   f
is the case that  X -> A -> B  =  X -> A -> B  implies  x = x'.)


Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 10:38:09 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's Limits 

Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 18:40:30 +1030 (CST)
From: William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au>

> Intuitionism's Limits: if C is a category sufficiently complex to
> demonstrate that some C-arrow f:a-->b is monic and B is a subcategory
> of C containing just f (and the requisite identity arrows), do we
> still know that f is monic? Should we? (Or, in other words, which
> view *should* dominate: Intuitionism, Realism, the category
> theoretic...?) What if C is something (semi?)fundamental like a
> category of all sets and functions, or a category of categories?
>

Whoops! The question is trivialised by using monicity as the relevant
property. Reconsider it in terms of say f as an isomorphism, or of
f holding some property in C that B lacks the resources to demonstrate.

I'm thinking aloud on this question: constructive maths should say that
of f in B there is no demonstration forthcoming, so judgment will be
withheld on whether or not f has the property; a category theorist might
say that category theory does not dwell on elements and that, in context,
B is no different from any isomorph of 2, so there positively is no
further property of f to be had other than that which can be
demonstrated in any isomorph of 2. This is more than Intuitionism will
allow.

Might I, then, go on to say that the philosophies of constructive
mathematics and category theory really are different?

William James (if I'm digging a hole, I want it to be big)


Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 10:35:52 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's Limits 

Date: Sun, 2 Mar 1997 15:27:28 -0500 (EST)
From: John Baez <baez@phys.psu.edu>

William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au> writes:

> I suppose the answer is that monicity is relative to a category,
> but what supports this as a claim? 

It seems to me that category theory takes the sensible viewpoint that
mathematical entities (e.g. objects and morphisms) only become
interesting through their relationship with other entities.  Every
arrow looks just like every other arrow if we consider it in
isolation.  Every arrow in a category C is an image of the what James
Dolan calls the "walking arrow" --- the nonidentity morphism in the
free category C0 on a single morphism --- under some functor F: C0 ->
C.  Studying an arrow in isolation is just like studying the walking
arrow, which is completely dull.  The fun begins only when we have a
bunch of arrows and start composing them.

This is one reason why I think n-category theory should be useful in
physics problems like quantum gravity, where it only makes sense to
speak of where or when an event occurs relative to other events, not
with respect to some spacetime manifold of fixed geometry.  For
some of the technical apsects of how this might go, see:

John Baez and James Dolan, Higher-dimensional algebra and topological
quantum field theory, Jour. Math. Phys. 36 (1995), 6073-6105.

Louis Crane, Clock and category: is quantum gravity algebraic?,
J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995), 6180-6195.  

These both appeared in a special issue on diffeomorphism-invariant 
physics.  


Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 10:37:27 -0400 (AST)
Subject: RE: Intuitionism's Limits 

Date: Sun, 2 Mar 97 21:09 EST
From: Fred E J Linton <0004142427@mcimail.com>

If  a  and  b  are *two* objects, then, in the category consisting solely of
those two objects, their respective identity maps, and one further map from
 a  to  b  (and nothing more), that map is both monic and epic.  Once embedded
in another category, however, that map may easily fail to remain monic, may
easily fail to remain epic, may remain one but not the other -- there's no
telling.  And if  a = b  instead, and  f  and the identity on  a  are the
only *two* maps there are, then clearly  f  *may* be idempotent, hence neither
monic nor epic; then again,  f  *may* be involutory, hence a true isomorphism.

I think true realism requires that one pay strict attention to the definitions,
refraining from free-associations with the vibrations of the terms defined.

Cheers,

-- Fred


Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 13:14:36 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 

Date: Mon, 3 Mar 1997 10:45:55 -0500 (EST)
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>
 
William James continues to write:
 
  Might I, then, go on to say that the philosophies of constructive
  mathematics and category theory really are different?
 
Constructive mathematics is a philosophy. Category theory is not.
The question doesn't even type-check.
 
Of course they're different.
 

Date: Tue, 4 Mar 1997 22:41:52 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 
 
Date: Tue, 4 Mar 1997 18:19:51 +1030 (CST)
From: William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au>
 
> William James continues to write:
>
>   Might I, then, go on to say that the philosophies of constructive
>   mathematics and category theory really are different?
>
> Constructive mathematics is a philosophy. Category theory is not.
> The question doesn't even type-check.
>
> Of course they're different.
 
Does category theory, being mathematics, have no associated philosophy?
 
(I grant you the original question would have been more recognisable
 given better use of language: "...philosophies of constructive
 mathematics and *of* category theory...")
 
William James


Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 11:14:25 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 
 
Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 10:54:19 +0000
From: Steve Vickers <sjv@doc.ic.ac.uk>
 
> Constructive mathematics is a philosophy. Category theory is not.
> The question doesn't even type-check.
>
> Of course they're different.
 
Philosophy is the love of wisdom; type-checking is not.
 
Of course category theory has its philosophy. To me it's "all things are
connected" - you cannot fully describe anything purely in itself but only
by the way it connects with others. Category theory makes the connections
explicit (as morphisms) and then characterizes things by their universal
properties.
 
The philosophy plays a real role in categorical practice: for instance, in
the idea that isomorphism between objects is more important than equality,
which is not something that can be meaningful just in terms of the formal
mathematics.
 
The philosophy also yields a criterion for evaluating the theory: Is
categorical structure adequate for describing the connections that we
actually find? The strength of the categorical view of "connection
structure" is amply confirmed by the power of the universal properties it
can express (compare it with, say, graph theory); but if it does fail us
anywhere, how might it advance beyond its present formalization? (There is
already a plausible answer here: topology has a different way of describing
the connections between a point and its neighbours, and the categorical and
topological approaches combine to make topos theory.)
 
I hesitate to try to reduce the philosophy of constructive mathematics to a
single pithy phrase, not least because there are different schools of
constructivism with apparently different philosopies. I shall therefore
duck the question of comparing "the philosopies of constructive mathematics
and category theory", but I don't believe it's a meaningless one.
 
Steve Vickers.
 
 
Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 11:15:07 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 
 
Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 12:46:26 +0000 (GMT)
From: Dusko Pavlovic <D.Pavlovic@doc.ic.ac.uk>
 
According to William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au>:
 > 
 > Does category theory, being mathematics, have no associated philosophy?
 
I'm afraid, William, that this presumed association of mathematics and
philosophy is actually a bit of a sad romance: while some philosophies
do like to be associated with mathematics, mathematics (it doesn't
even have a proper plural) mathematics, most of the time, can't care
less.
 
While philosophy spends a lot of time defining itself and its
relationship with the world, mathematics tends to be a kind of work
some people like to do, taking up the world whichever way it comes to
them: as a model of a process, as a game of signs or pictures, as a
funny language shared between them and theri colleagues... Most
mathematicians just smirk not only on philosophy, but even on category
theory, or anything else deeply concerned with its own identity. They
just like to solve their problems, and sometimes solve other people's
problems, thereby gaining everyone's respect and admiration.
 
At least, that's the way I have seen it. Perhaps it helps with your
questions a bit.
 
-- Dusko Pavlovic
 
 
Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 11:13:38 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 
 
Date: Wed, 05 Mar 1997 00:56 -0500 (EST)
From: Fred E J Linton <0004142427@mcimail.com>
 
Any philosophy category theory may have would have at its core, I think,
the notion that mathematical objects are known *not* in isolation but
in the context of their comrades.  The group of rational integers,
accompanied *only* by its identity map, and the Thom space of the
tangent bundle of some exotic manifold, accompanied once again *only*
by its identity map, are, as categories, indistinguishable.
 
Plucked out of their original contexts, there is no longer any social setting
where one can find any difference between them that really *makes* a
difference.
 
According to some other views of mathematics, the group of rational integers,
that particular Thom space, the real number {pi}, and my current left shoe,
all have unique mathematical personalities that let them be "obviously"
distinguished one from another, without any reference even to what I would
call their "natural ambient environments".
 
>From my perspective, admittedly that of a categorist, these views result
from a simple failure to recognize that what passes for the "intrinsic
structure" of a mathematical object is in fact nothing more (nor less)
than a clear understanding of its relations with its mates, of roughly
similar character, in some category (that "went without saying") they all
jointly inhabit -- even the phrase "roughly similar character" is justifiable
*only* by virtue of the fact that they *do* all inhabit some same category.
 
I hope I'm actually making myself clear, and not just preaching to the converted.

-- Fred
 

Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 17:24:29 -0400 (AST)
Subject: From moderator 

The philosophy of the categories list is to allow wide latitude for 
discussion, but the current discussion of philosophy is getting rather 
far afield. Therefore further contributions are discouraged, and will not 
be accepted beyond 5pm GMT on Friday, March 7.

Best wishes   
Bob Rosebrugh, Moderator
categories


Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 17:21:16 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits / flame on 

Date: Wed, 05 Mar 1997 09:55:51 -0800
From: John C. Mitchell <mitchell@cs.stanford.edu>

>Philosophy is the love of wisdom; type-checking is not.

Well that's a bizarre statement. Not that I want to get into this
discussion or anything, but can't a love of wisdom be consistent
with type checking? 

John Mitchell


Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 17:20:03 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's (read "Philosophy's") Limits 

Date: Wed, 5 Mar 1997 11:27:42 -0500 (EST)
From: James Stasheff <jds@math.unc.edu>

this seems to ignore the distinction between neighbors (aka comrades)
and parts (elements)
The group of rational integers, with its non-identity automrophisms
can, i thought, be distinguished from  the Thom space of the
> tangent bundle of some exotic manifold with its non-identity automrophisms
without comparison to other sets of `numbers' or less exotic manifolds

.oooO   Jim Stasheff		jds@math.unc.edu
(UNC)   Math-UNC		(919)-962-9607
 \ (    Chapel Hill NC		FAX:(919)-962-2568
  \*)   27599-3250

        http://www.math.unc.edu/Faculty/jds

	May 15 - August 15:
	146 Woodland Dr
	Lansdale PA 19446	(215)822-6707


On Wed, 5 Mar 1997, categories wrote:

> Date: Wed, 05 Mar 1997 00:56 -0500 (EST)
> From: Fred E J Linton <0004142427@mcimail.com>
> 
> Any philosophy category theory may have would have at its core, I think,
> the notion that mathematical objects are known *not* in isolation but
> in the context of their comrades.  The group of rational integers,
> accompanied *only* by its identity map, and the Thom space of the
> tangent bundle of some exotic manifold, accompanied once again *only*
> by its identity map, are, as categories, indistinguishable.
> 
> Plucked out of their original contexts, there is no longer any social setting
> where one can find any difference between them that really *makes* a
> difference.
> 
> According to some other views of mathematics, the group of rational integers,
> that particular Thom space, the real number {pi}, and my current left shoe,
> all have unique mathematical personalities that let them be "obviously"
> distinguished one from another, without any reference even to what I would
> call their "natural ambient environments".
> 
> >From my perspective, admittedly that of a categorist, these views result
> from a simple failure to recognize that what passes for the "intrinsic
> structure" of a mathematical object is in fact nothing more (nor less)
> than a clear understanding of its relations with its mates, of roughly
> similar character, in some category (that "went without saying") they all
> jointly inhabit -- even the phrase "roughly similar character" is justifiable
> *only* by virtue of the fact that they *do* all inhabit some same category.
> 
> I hope I'm actually making myself clear, and not just preaching to the converted.
> 
> -- Fred
> 
> 
> 


Date: Thu, 6 Mar 1997 13:29:55 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Intuitionism's Limits 
 
Date: Wed, 05 Mar 1997 22:36:19 -0800
From: Vaughan Pratt <pratt@cs.Stanford.EDU>
 
 
        Date: Tue, 4 Mar 1997 18:19:51 +1030 (CST)
        From: William James <wjames@arts.adelaide.edu.au>
        (I grant you the original question would have been more
        recognisable given better use of language: "...philosophies of
        constructive mathematics and *of* category theory...")
 
Your original question was "Which view should dominate?", where "the
category theoretic view" was one of your options.  (You had several
questions but this one seemed the most central.)
 
If you are asking whether the primary expression of structure should be
in terms of relations between elements or transformations of objects,
then I would answer this as follows.
 
The analogous question for physics is whether energy and matter consist
of particles or waves.  The consensus in physics today is that both
energy and matter can be viewed more or less equally accurately, if not
equally insightfully, as either particles or waves.  Which offers more
insight depends on the circumstances.
 
The corresponding position for mathematics would be that structure can
be expressed more or less equally well in elementary or
transformational terms, and that which approach gives more insight
depends on the circumstances.
 
The extent to which this is not the consensus in mathematics today is
less a reflection on either approach than on the conceptual health of
mathematics relative to that of physics.
 
Vaughan Pratt


Date: Fri, 7 Mar 1997 15:43:37 -0400 (AST)
Subject: non philosophy

Date: Fri, 7 Mar 1997 14:24:15 -0500 (EST)
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>

William James answered his own question when he asked:

  Does category theory, being mathematics, have no associated
  philosophy?

Yes, category theory is mathematics. Therefore its associated
philosophy is whatever philosophy one chooses to associate with
mathematics.

As for the latter, Dusko provided a pretty good answer. I would modify
it only to reflect that mathematics (which, as always in the absence
of a qualifier, means pure mathematics) is a subject matter. Most
mathematicians are sufficiently confident about their subject matter
that they feel no need for a semantics, much less a stated philosophy.
(Yes, it has been notoriously difficult to define intensionally, but
that's not special to mathematics. What's the subject matter of
physics? If either mathematicians or physicists were -- using Dusko's
language -- to spend a lot of time defining their subject, there never
would have been much mathematics or physics.)

Steve thinks that the existence of a philosophy of category theory is
an "of course". In one of the public meanings of the word "philosophy"
he's certainly correct but not, I think, in the sense that would
include something like constructivism. (The public meaning in question
has even less than type-checking to do with either love or wisdom.
Well, maybe it has something to do with love.)

May I suggest that the applied mathematician may have a very different
understanding of category theory from the mathematician. Steve says
that category theory is "all things are connected". But that's an
article of faith for almost any mathematician. He goes on to say, "you
cannot fully describe anything purely in itself but only by the way it
connects with others." This assertion about what "you cannot" do
sounds like it could be a good way of describing *applied*
mathematicians.

To begin with, Eilenberg and Mac Lane defined categories in order to
define functors and they defined functors in order to define natural
transformations. Immediately it was noted that a new tool existed to
pin down -- in a formal way -- how it is that some of the all things
are connected. It should be noted that categories -- and more to the
point, functors -- have always been considered tools for studying the
subject matter of mathematics. Tools, not the subject matter itself.

I am on record that the language of categories began to become
respectable when Frank Adams was able to count the number of
independent vector fields on each sphere using a construction that
quantified over functors: it produced an n-ary transformation on the
K-functor for every n-ary endofunctor on the category of finite
dimensional vector spaces (which he assembled into what are now known
as the Adams operations).

One of the better successes since then has been the use of categories
in finding connections between various foundational systems. Because
some of these systems are constructivist it has apparently caused some
to think that categories are intrinsically constructivist.  Strange.

There's another important aspect of category theory. Most categories,
in the beginning at least, were categories that naturally arose from
existing branches of mathematics. Some of these categories, though,
had never been lived in before they were invented as categories.  Joel
Cohen named one of these the "Freyd Category" (named not after Peter
but Jennifer): its an abelian category whose full subcategory of
projectives is the stable-homotopy category; all the other objects
have no easy description; the category can be described as the target
of the universal homology theory. But a much better example is in
Serre's dissertation. This work, hailed by many as the single most
substantive dissertation ever written, contends with the two abelian
categories that result when one starts with the category of abelian
groups and identifies with the zero group all finite groups in one
case, or all finitely generated groups in the second case.  Most
remarkably, Serre did all this without using category theory. (The
fact that the first non-trivial construction of a category occured
without benefit of category theory must be reckoned an embarrassment
for category theorists.)

But in recent applications I think a very different type of question
is being asked: "Is it possible that there is a category in which
... can take place?"  These questions are at the heart of many
approaches to programming semantics. And they are at the heart of many
of the uses of categories in theoretical physics. But the first
serious example came, in fact, a long time ago. In the late 60's
Lawvere's approach to differential geometry asked just this type of
question. Elementary topoi made their first appearance as just a
preliminary part of the answer.

So what's this all have to do with philosophy?

Not much, of course.

