Date: Tue, 25 Jun 1996 18:02:08 -0300 (ADT)
Subject: Isbell interview 

Date: Tue, 25 Jun 1996 15:34:37 -0400
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>

It looks much better on the web, but here's a plain text copy

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Topology Atlas Document # topc-06.txt

WWW url: http://www.unipissing.ca/topology/t/o/p/c/06.txt

Topology Atlas, 

atlas@yorku.ca

http://www.unipissing.ca/topology/

------------------------------------------------------------------

                    AN INTERVIEW WITH JOHN ISBELL

                Interview from volume 1 # 2 of TopCom

                               by

                         K.D. Magill, Jr.



I'm not certain when I first met John Isbell. I do remember seeing him
at the summer meeting of the AMS in 1966 at Cornell University but I
can't even recall if we spoke. I do recall that he and Dov Tamari were
having a serious conversation at the time. Dov was chairman of the
mathematics department of SUNY at Buffalo and was probably trying to
recruit John but was unsuccessful. The "old" University of Buffalo, a
private university with a very small mathematics department had, not
too long before, been designated as one of the four university centers
of the SUNY system and Dov had been hired, appointed chairman, and was
given the mandate of building up the department. He did an
extraordinary job in this regard during the three years of his
chairmanship, bringing in some extremely able people.  Unfortunately,
however, interdepartmental problems surfaced, with the consequence
that some of the most able of these people left after the third year
of Dov's chairmanship.

I was chosen to succeed Dov as chairman and was told that my major
task was to continue to build on the foundation laid by Dov. In other
words, a large part of my job was to continue to recruit outstanding
talent. This brings me to what I remember as the second time I ran
into John. That was in the fall of 1968 at the Indian Institute of
Technology in Kanpur, India where we both were attending a topology
conference. I remember promising John that I wouldn't ruin his
conference by harassing him about accepting an appointment at Buffalo,
but I also mentioned that I wouldn't be doing my job as chairman if I
didn't at least bring the topic up. John said something to the effect
that he wasn't terribly interested but he wasn't entirely uninterested
either. I wasn't too optimistic but upon my return to Buffalo, I
arranged for John to give a Colloquium talk. At that time, John was
negotiating with several other universities, all of which were higher
on his priority list than SUNY at Buffalo. But things worked out
extremely well for us. To borrow a phrase from the Al Pacino
character, Michael Corleone, in the motion picture The Godfather, I
simply made John "an offer he couldn't refuse".  John accepted a
position and I am convinced that this was one of the turning points in
the development of the mathematics department here at SUNY at
Buffalo. We have since attracted other very talented people that very
likely wouldn't have considered the place if John hadn't already been
here.

KDM: What information can you give me about your ancestors?  When did
they come to the USA and where did they first settle?

ISBELL: Well. Your asking about my ancestors reminds me of the young
man who liked pancakes... he had two and a half trunks full.  My
father collected ancestors, and he had several notebooks full. He
pretended to follow some line back to the wife of Rollo the Norman,
the founder of Normandy. Of course to Rollo too, but Rollo's wife ...
in my father's genealogy, at least ...  was a princess, an English
princess named Gisela. So her ancestors are all there in the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, right back to Sceof, son of Noah. The Bible
never heard of Sceof, but it does have Noah, and it gives his
ancestors right back to the beginning. So yes, I had them.

KDM: That's good, but when did they come to the USA and where did they
first settle?

ISBELL: You don't mean all of them; I expect you mean the first
American Isbell ancestor. That was my father's great disappointment.
He tracked them back, through Alabama and Virginia, to 1659 in
Caroline County, Virginia, and there the trail ends. The county
courthouse burned in 1659, and when the smoke clears, there's old
Throckmorton Isbell or whatever, paying taxes, suing his neighbors,
and no clue to where he came from or when.

KDM: What were their occupations? In particular, what were the
occupations of your parents and grandparents?

ISBELL: Father, army officer, mother, housewife. She taught school at
first, up in the Virginia hills, but in 1917 she struck for the bright
lights of Baltimore, and I think she had a pretty good time until they
married in 1923. She was working as a typist. His father was in
lumber. First traveling around buying it on the hoof, and then working
at the central office in Nashville. Mom's father would be the only
intellectual in sight, he was a printer, and he published a weekly
paper when he could, in West Virginia and Virginia.

KDM: Any of them still living?

ISBELL: Yes, my mother is still living at home, with my older sister
looking after her. Mom's 97. Frances is only 72, and she's in better
shape than I am.

KDM: We weren't supposed to get to siblings until later in the
interview. Let me ask, when were you born ...  and where?

ISBELL: 1930, in Portland, Oregon. Dad was a captain stationed at
Vancouver Barracks, Washington, at the time.

KDM: Back to the siblings. How many are there and what are they doing
now?

ISBELL: Two, one of each. My brother is 71; retired from the Postal
Service nine years ago after a blood clot in his aorta nearly killed
him. He hasn't walked since, but I expect he's pretty happy. He, his
wife, and both his daughters are now in the same small town where his
wife grew up, Clarksville, Tennessee. One girl has two kids and a
husband, a Professor of Spanish. My sister never married; she followed
my father's line of work, Air Force Intelligence in her case. Besides
shepherding our mother she's, not running the farm, but managing the
property; they hire a farmer to do the farming. And she's a leading
figure in the local branch of the Texas Historical Society.

KDM: Which of these people had the most influence on you?

ISBELL: That would have to be my father. My mother was a support, of
course; her absence might have done God only knows what to me, but she
wasn't absent, and it was my father who expected me to show
something. He pulled me out of public school after the ninth grade,
when I started to goof off, and sent me away to military school.  That
was ...

KDM: OK but let's talk about elementary school first. Where did you go
to elementary school?

ISBELL: Where? That's Reno, grades 1 to 4; Minneapolis, 4 and 5;
Gainesville, Georgia, grade 6. They keep moving officers around, you
know. "Where are you from?" "Man, I'm not from, I'm an Army Brat. I'm
here."

KDM: Oh. Well, then, high school was mostly in one place, was it?

ISBELL: What we called high school, I had all in one place, Staunton
Military Academy in Virginia. Junior high school in Arlington.

KDM: What were your favorite subjects?

ISBELL: That has to be math. The only subject I took Saturday classes
in. There was an enthusiastic young math teacher who organized a class
of two of us, eleventh graders, to study analytic geometry. Then he
overreached and tried to take us on to group theory. But he was a true
Huntingtonian, like E.W. Huntington, the axiom man. He didn't see any
need to tell us what groups were for, and he lost us after I think one
lesson in group theory.

KDM: You keep answering the following question which, in this case, is
what teachers influenced you the most?

ISBELL: Oh, well, I'm not sure Mr. Foster influenced
 me the most. His subject did. One reason I wasn't ready for group
theory was that I wanted more analytic geometry than he and his book
offered. Foster, and I think the authors, pitched it as showing the
equivalence of geometry and algebra. Now I had pretty definite ideas
about algebra, and geometry seemed a LOT bigger...  any curve you can
draw, not to mention disconnected graphs which of course you already
get with xy = 1. How could they be equivalent? I did NOT have definite
ideas about what a construction was. One of the Bernoullis said...  of
course I had no idea of this at the time...  that the limit of a
sequence should be thought of as the last or $\infty^{th}$ term. A
sequence of three terms has a third term, he said; a sequence of ten
terms has a tenth term, and a sequence of $\infty$ terms has an
$\infty^{th}$ term. The task of the mathematician is to find it. Okay,
so take an arbitrary curve; draw one, say your signature. A
half-civilized algebraist, like Mr.  Foster (Achilles Foster; he later
got a Ph.D. and a professorship in Newark) would say you can't write
an equation for it, and in that respect geometry is not reducible to
algebra. But I figured you could write an equation for it, and I
proved it. I cheated, of course. In fact, what I actually told all the
kids who would listen was, I can write an equation to forge your
signature. I would approximate the signature with a union of line
segments.  Ask them to imagine magnifying and getting a really close
approximation, and they agreed that a union of line segments would
make a good forgery of their signature. Then show that d(A,P)+d(P,B) =
d(A,B) is an algebraic equation; with radicals, since the distance is
the square root of the sum of the squares, but radicals are perfectly
legitimate, you use them to write the quadratic formula. Finally point
out that f(x,y)g(x,y) = 0 has for graph the set of all points (x,y)
where f OR g is 0...  the union...  and you have it. Descartes freed
from every blemish; algebra = geometry.

No, the teacher who influenced me the most would probably be old
Marshall M.  Brice, the head of English. We groused about how Brice
had no soul when he asked us on a test how many kisses the
knight-at-arms took to close the eyes of La Belle Dame sans Merci...
counting kisses seemed the opposite of poetry. But then I thought some
more about it. I didn't get as far as Keats took his brother, I think
it was; anyway there is a letter in which he mentions that the
number...  four...  seemed about right, and at least treats the right
and left eye equally. I did, however, begin to get the idea that if
it's worth doing it's worth doing right. And Brice evidently took
pleasure in making me look stupid when I came up with a remark
intended to make me look smart. But God knows that's fair. And he did
it very well. I was reading some Marlowe that year, my senior year,
and Brice tried to get me to read Kyd. I'm not sure if any of Kyd's
plays were even available, anyway I didn't even look, but I did take
it to heart and started on Kyd when I had a college library. Kyd is to
Marlowe something like Fourier to Laplace. Except that Shakespeare
learned from Marlowe, while neither Newton nor Einstein learned from
Laplace. But the point is, Kyd plays better then he reads, which is
putting first things first. Just as Fourier's ideas are better than
his definitions.

KDM: When did you first become interested in mathematics?

ISBELL: Interested? I think in the winter of 1936--37. In school, the
numbers went 1,2, oh you know how they go; but when the temperature
dropped to 0 it didn't stop dropping. The numbers kept right on going
down. And that is much more vivid than looking at a lot of ants, or
pebbles, and thinking a thousand, a million, and on and on. Just step
out the door and there in your face is a number you had no idea
 of last week. It's not that I took up mathematical games, but the
ontology of mathematics; that's not something you're going to
forget. It must have been the same half-year or so that I got into
fractions. Not in school, but in life.

KDM: I would imagine that you were an exceptional student.  Did any of
your fellow students impress you in any manner?

ISBELL: I think not in an interesting manner, for whoever might read
this thing.

KDM: When did you graduate from high school?

ISBELL: 1947.

KDM: Where did you attend college or university? What were your major
and minor subjects?

ISBELL: That's kind of a tangle. Five colleges, up to the B.S. I was
longer at Chicago than any of the others, because after doing my
fourth year there I started summer school, registering for one course
with Irving Kaplansky. I minored in physics and majored in math.

KDM: Did any of your professors have much of an influence on you?

ISBELL: The one who influenced me most, I didn't take a course
from. That was Saunders Mac Lane. I was reading their papers, and I
got more from Mac Lane's papers than anyone else's at Chicago. I
didn't see much of him during the academic year, but he engaged me in
a conversation when he first saw me wandering around Eckhart Hall and
then, we at least nodded when we passed, and then when Chicago
rejected my application for an assistantship and I was sweating out my
Texas and Oklahoma applications, Mac Lane wanted to know what I was
going to do. Well, I wanted to know what I was going to do, too. I had
spent three years in crummy colleges down there (one of those was
Washington in St. Louis, but it didn't show me anything except an
interesting German professor...  he thought Coriolanus, Shakespeare's
Coriolanus , was the perfect play; I guess Coriolanus is a sort of
civilized Siegfried), and I didn't want to go back there, but I needed
an assistantship. There was more. This was Joe McCarthy's second
act...  on a Shakespearean plan of five acts. Act III would be when
Eisenhower held his nose and rode McCarthy's train to the White
House. Well, Northern and California universities were firing
leftists; Oklahoma was firing Quakers. To hold a faculty position in a
state school there you had to sign an oath that you would shoot
commies. Ainsley Diamond had been a noncombatant officer in the Air
Force in World War II, but he wouldn't sign to shoot them. It didn't
say 'shoot', it said 'bear arms'. I didn't mind that for myself, but
when Oklahoma A & M fired Diamond, Nachman Aronszajn quit too, and
they moved to the University of Kansas. Mac Lane urged me to stay in
Chicago. I could certainly get a job to support myself, and I could
study even if I couldn't pay tuition. I took an assistantship at
Oklahoma A & M instead; but when I blew up after six months in
Oklahoma I came back to Chicago to try to work out what to do next.

KDM: I'm surprised Chicago turned you down.

ISBELL: Well, I had a B average. Counting the D Chern gave me. But
they don't like D's in math. And getting a D with Chern was not a
smart move. I was fascinated with set theory and game theory and I
goofed off in differential geometry.

KDM: What did you do after Oklahoma?

ISBELL: I went from Chicago to Lawrence, Kansas, and got myself
considered as a candidate for an assistantship for '52-53. But it
turned out that the Oklahoma A & M chairman, Wayne Johnson, had been
urging A.W. Tucker at Princeton to do something about me. And somehow
or other Tucker decided I should have a job at George Washington,
where he was a consultant on an ONR project, and he took me over. A
respectable job in Washington, for me in 1952, was like a non-teaching
job in Baltimore for my mother in 1917; I was off like a shot. And
Tucker decided, in due course, that I would do.

KDM: What areas outside of mathematics interested you?

ISBELL: You mean intellectual areas? No heavy interest outside of
math.

KDM: Were you involved in any extracurricular activities?

ISBELL: As an undergraduate, none. Activities, yeah, but no organized
extracurricular activities. In Nashville, my junior year, I played a
lot of pinball.

KDM: When and where did you begin graduate school?

ISBELL: Well, my program of math courses for my undergraduate major
didn't include the courses I took in Spring Quarter, so I guess I
began graduate study at Chicago in March 1951. But I became officially
a part-time graduate student only in that summer, and a regular
graduate student at Oklahoma A & M in the fall.

KDM: Who were the faculty members there that impressed you the most?

ISBELL: That would be O.H. Hamilton, a 1938 R.L. Moore student. Under
Hamilton's direction, I started to write what was supposed to be a
master's thesis. I couldn't stick that year out, but before I left
Stillwater I sat in a hotel for I think three days and finished the
thesis, and Hamilton said I couldn't get the assistantship back but if
I wanted to do something about getting enough credits he could okay it
as a master's thesis. That was encouraging, I was doing something
right; but it was even more encouraging seven months later when
J.H. Roberts accepted it for the Duke Journal.

KDM: Who, among your fellow students, impressed you the most?

ISBELL: Well the best graduate students at A $amp; M had just left to
go to Kansas with Aronszajn. I got to know them that year, with Al
Jennings having married a Stillwater girl, and then my trying to
follow the crowd to Kansas. I think you could say Al Jennings. He
seemed to me clearly a pro. He was not world-class like Mac Lane and
Andr\'e Weil; but like Mac Lane, he seemed to be basically satisfied
with the world. It was an attitude I hadn't seen much of. Wayne
Johnson had it, but Wayne didn't strike me as a pro. Hamilton was a
pro, but he didn't seem satisfied, more resigned.

KDM: I seem to remember that your doctoral dissertation was in game
theory. Who was your thesis director?

ISBELL: Tucker. I don't think he expected it when I went to Princeton,
and I certainly didn't, but I was sick and tired of being a student
and I saw how to finish a game theory dissertation in two months.

KDM: How old were you when you received the Ph.D. degree?

ISBELL: 23.

KDM: You told me who supervised your first paper. What was the title,
where was it published, and when?

ISBELL: "Homogeneous spaces", Duke J., 1953.

KDM: So that was topology?

ISBELL: Oh, yes. My first four papers, I think, were in topology. The
second was a joint paper with Mel Henriksen, partially repairing an
error in Ed Hewitt's very influential paper on "Rings of real-valued
continuous functions, I". That second paper was published in the
Proceedings in 1953. We wrote it at Kansas in June '52. The third was
my sequel to Henriksen-Isbell; I saw how to get the complete result
that Hewitt had claimed: all residue class fields of rings C(X) are
real-closed. I did that in December '53, after finishing my
dissertation.  Then I think the fourth was my T\^ohoku paper on
"Zero-dimensional spaces", written in the summer of '54. That was a
nice paper, but it appeared at the same time as a closely related and
clearly better paper by Hugh Dowker, something like "Local dimension
of normal spaces".

KDM: So did your collaboration with Mel Henriksen go right on from
1952?

ISBELL: Well, nothing like continuously. Obviously when we worked on
matters of interest to both of us we exchanged preprints if not
earlier previews. I remember sitting on a hillside at Fort Bliss,
after I was drafted in October '54, reading Gillman-Henriksen
"Concerning rings of continuous functions" while waiting for orders to
attack the Blues or the Purple People-Eaters or whatever they were
called. But we were together in Madison in the summer of '55 and
didn't collaborate. Our second and third joint papers were written
only when we were both at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1956-57
and they put us in the same office.

KDM: You were drafted in October '54 and you were in Madison in the
summer of '55?

ISBELL: On furlough. I was invited for the four-week Summer Institute,
but I only had two weeks' furlough time earned. I think maybe I had
less: two weeks a year, and they were giving me an advance, letting me
have two weeks after nine months.

KDM: Did the army keep using you to attack Purple People-Eaters?

ISBELL: Oh, no, that was just basic training. Then they sent me to
Aberdeen Proving Ground and I wrote papers. When the Army permitted.
We had a little celebration the day the Labs had advertised a lecture
by Al Jennings on his dissertation and people came from as far as
Penn, in Philadelphia, and from the University of Maryland, and they
went to the room where the talk was to be and some asshole had to get
up and say "I'm afraid Dr. Jennings has KP today. The lecture is
canceled".

KDM: I seem to remember Don Johnson telling me that you and he and Mel
had published a joint paper and you and he hadn't met at the time.

ISBELL: Yeah. I think that's much less unusual now than it used to
be. The way that happened, Mel and Don had a forty or fifty-page joint
paper which came out in Acta, and they had started another one that
was just a stub when Don left Purdue and went to his first job at Penn
State. I came in to Purdue for the year, and got copies of both, and I
saw what to do with the stub. It didn't make forty pages, but it made
a paper.  [MH: The Acta paper was Don Johnson's doctoral thesis, he
was the sole author, and it was about 50 pages in length. Don and I
had written two papers on archimedean lattice-ordered algebras that
appeared eventually in Fundamenta, and the three of us wrote the third
one for Fundamenta to which John refers.]

KDM: When did you become interested in Category Theory?  Evidently, by
the time you completed your book entitled "Uniform Spaces".

ISBELL: Summer 1951. That is, after the Spring Quarter was over or
practically over. I had gotten as far in Mac Lane's papers as, NOT the
big category paper of 1945 with Eilenberg, but the new 1950 paper
"Duality for groups". I didn't know how to do research in category
theory for years after that. It was very hard, before Kan introduced
adjoint functors. Homological algebra, and to some extent abelian
categories, were well enough licked into shape that some questions
were clearly worth working on; but papers in general category theory
before Kan were heavy on the axioms and light on the theorems.

KDM: You seem to have a very fruitful collaboration with both Bill
Lawvere and Steve Schanuel. Would you to comment on this collaboration
and on these two people?

ISBELL: The first comment I have is that what I have with Bill isn't a
collaboration. We have never even started a joint paper. We have
talked about ideas, certainly about ideas in several of my papers, and
I acknowledged Bill's help in those papers, and I think it went the
other way a few times, but we don't work together. I think the best
recruiting move I ever made was going on leave to Italy in 1973 to try
to sell Fatima on Buffalo after Bill and Fatima turned down our 1971
offer. Talking with Bill, I often feel like a fly buzzing around a
cow. (It seems to me I can liken Bill to a cow, if I'm just a fly
myself.) On any easy question, I'll probably see the answer first. But
his thoughts seem to move on a level where I don't function, I can
barely see down there. Steve, now, I can work with Steve, and we have
done five or six joint papers. The reason there haven't been fifteen
is that I don't know enough. I am particularly proud of our joint
paper on number theory. Steve knows at least ten times as much number
theory as I, and one would think we would never start a collaboration
in that area. One would be right; we didn't. I wrote a sort of
semi-paper and was pleased enough with it to send a copy to Paul
Bateman and to show it to Steve and Tom Cusick. Paul wrote back
greatly improving my results. But the exchange of letters took more
than a week.  Meanwhile, Tom had shown me that I had extended a result
of Dirichlet...  a ridiculous little extension, but an extension. That
gave a way of looking at the problem, so suddenly it was fifty times
as interesting. I could do a tiny bit more with my methods, and, wham!
Steve found the right method. It was in a paper of Walfisz, and it
finished the job; Dirichlet had less than half solved the
problem... probably not losing any sleep over it...  and Isbell and
Schanuel finished it. That's in Proc. AMS 60 (1976). 65--67, if any of
your readers want the theorem. It's a very nice theorem, but there's a
little story about it that must be told. At the next annual meeting of
the AMS, the first evening I go into a restaurant with a couple of
other guys, and there is Paul Erd\" os coming in with a couple of
other guys. (Maybe gals, I don't recall). So I say "Paul! let $j =
o(n)$, etc. etc." I get through the hypothesis, and I pause for
breath. And he tells me the conclusion. So I say, "Oh, my God. Is that
your theorem?" "No," he says. "It's a nice theorem. I never heard
about it; but if there is a theorem, and that is the hypothesis, then
this must be the conclusion." Oh, and Paul Bateman.  His letter
greatly improving my results was crossed by a preprint of our paper
with much better results than his.

KDM: You have published an enormous number of papers on many different
topics. How many papers have you published by now?

ISBELL: Math Reviews on-line counts 146 under my name. Six or so
non-papers; corrections, a paper in Alexander Soifer's Geombinatorics,
and the like. But I have about that many non-reviewed publications, at
least three of them in the Monthly. And then I wrote three of John
Rainwater's dozen or so papers, all of M.G. Stanley...  that's four...
and all of H.C. Enos, that's two. If you want an enormous number of
papers, look up Erd\"os or Shelah.

KDM: You have an extraordinarily broad knowledge of mathematics in
general. Often, when I begin to do research on a particular topic and
I don't know if something has been done, I ask you and if you know of
no reference, then I know I have to go home and prove it. This
exceptional knowledge is certainly a strong point. What do you regard
as your other strong points?

ISBELL: Ugh. Answering a question like that is a no-win shot. One
can't help remembering the story of the enthusiastic disciple of
Peano, telling Henri Poincar\'e that Peano's symbolic calculus or
whatever it was "gives the mathematician wings". "Alas, poor Peano!
Ten years with wings; and not to have flown!" Well, besides a fairly
decent memory and a fair share of low cunning, I may have gained more
than I lost by having an inability to close. I return a day after
mailing off a submitted paper, or four months after, or twenty years
after publication, to look at a solved problem again and see if there
is any more in it. It costs time, but one-thirtieth of the time it
pays off, and I may have gained more than I lost by it.

KDM: How many doctoral students have you had? Who are they and what
were their dissertation topics? What are they doing now?

ISBELL: If we had been doing this three years ago, only 39 years after
my doctorate, I would have asked you to omit the question; but I had a
student to be proud of in 1994. The first was Richard Yoh, Ph.D.,
1973. I would have to look up his dissertation title. It was something
around adjoint functors and algebraic theories, and as I recall it
boiled down to about a six-page paper in a decent journal. Yoh got a
job at Florida, and started something I thought more interesting, on
semigroups $S$ and $S$-sets. As I recall, he published one paper on
that and submitted another, which he couldn't get published. Anyway he
came up for tenure at Florida and was fired. He was co-manager, as I
understood it, of a car dealership in Gainesville, and at least a year
after he left the university he was still doing that, maybe
full-time. Then there was Miroslav Klun, Ph.D., 1974. Steve Schanuel
chaired Klun's committee, because I was on leave in Poland at the
time; but every major topic in the dissertation was well started
before Steve took over. Klun was a very touchy man. He kept getting
into quarrels with other graduate students, and with faculty
members. As far as I know, only with three faculty members, but these
were three independent cases, at least two more than one could
reasonably expect. I was the third.  The last I heard, Klun was still
not speaking to me; and he was teaching at Northeastern. I don't think
he had tenure, and I don't think he ever published the bulk of his
dissertation. It was on models of the affine part of group
theory. Some of the dissertation was on inverse semigroups, and he
published that in Semigroup Forum. The next student, oficially my
second, was Madhav Tamhankar in 1976. Tamhankar's dissertation was a
very nice paper in Algebra Universalis. Almost all of it was proving a
theorem I had published in J. Algebra in 1967; but my proof didn't
work. The beginning of the line was A.A. Albert's 1940 theorem that in
an ordered division ring, every element algebraic over the center is
in the center.  Albert had a restriction, I'm pretty sure the whole
thing had to be finite-dimensional over the center, but that was just
because...  try to remember how antediluvian 1940 was, they hardly
knew Bourbaki!...  Albert didn't call an extension an algebra over a
field unless it was finite-dimensional. (Infinity was transcendental.)
Anyway, Bernhard Neumann pointed out in Math. Reviews that Albert had
proved what I said. Tamhankar's theorem is that in an ordered ring, a
division subring algebraic over the center is in the center. You have
to work much, much harder to prove that.  Tamhankar had one-year jobs,
or maybe less, for about three years in Canada and the U.S., and
finally went back to India where he had a secure job teaching
engineers. I think that after leaving North America he published no
more research.

Now, 1994: Till Plewe. Till is going to be heard from, in fact he has
already started. His dissertation at least doubled knowledge on
spatiality of locale products of spaces. Nice products of spaces are
spatial, e.g.  products of two factors one of which is locally compact
(theorem of Dowker and Strauss) and countable products of complete
metric spaces (my theorem).  Beyond the dissertation, I have a writeup
in Topology Atlas on the state of knowledge in descriptive locale
theory, which says there are two and a half (good) theorems in this
very new subject; one is mine and the other $1{\frac{1}{2}}$ are
Till's. There are two further important papers, one joint with Anders
Kock. Till is on a postdoc at Imperial College, London (with Steve
Vickers).

KDM: When and under what circumstances did you meet your wife?

ISBELL: Yeah. I think Joan was similar material to my mother and me;
but maybe she was behind the door when they gave out stubbornness.
She was a sorority girl; that was compulsory. She dropped out and
married when she had a proposal from a man already earning a living,
and she had kids. And kids. She put her foot down at five. This was
possible, because it was 1953. Joan fought her way back to college,
and when we met in 1960 she had a new divorce and was one course short
of a B.A. So her real life centered on campus. We were actually
introduced by Don Silberger, who got a Ph.D. under Anne Morel in 1971
and is now a professor at New Paltz.

KDM: How many children do you have? What are their names and ages?

ISBELL: Margaret is 34, John Claiborne 33, Brecht 31. I have to tell
you about Brecht's name. There we were with five kids, six kids, seven
kids. There was no fear of Maggie getting lost, she being my first. Or
Clay: my first son. But the new one was going to be just another
kid. So like Walter Shandy's son, he needed a name of power. Unlike
poor Tristram Shandy, Brecht got the name of power.

KDM: What are the professions of your children and their spouses?

ISBELL: Maggie has been working for the city of Bristol.  Bristol,
Avon, England; her husband Tony Thornborough is a journalist there.
Neither of them has been very well paid, but they have two kids and
Maggie is starting university in the Fall '96 at Bristol
University. In education; she looks forward to working with kids
instead of people who are already beaten. Now, Clay; he's the one who
has a profession.  Assistant professor of French at Indiana,
Bloomington. His author is Germaine de Stael. Brecht graduated from
MIT with a major in God knows what (political science with a side of
English). He's been doing miscellaneous office work, as what used to
be called a Kelly Girl. He wants to get into music publishing.

KDM: Do you have any grandchildren and if so, do you get the
opportunity to visit with them on any regular basis?

ISBELL: As I said, Maggie has two kids; Z\'elie will be four this
summer, and Alexander is two. I saw them in August '94 in Switzerland,
August '95 all over the West (Chicago, Grand Canyon, Yellowstone), and
this August we're taking a holiday in Wales.

KDM: What are your mathematical plans for the immediate future? In
particular, what areas and problems have your attention at the moment?

ISBELL: Not a whole lot. I have two little papers to write up; one of
them, I keep looking for a handle to turn it into a considerable
paper. These are in descriptive locale theory and what could be called
descriptive category theory. There is also an unsolved problem Ivan
Rival has accepted for Order, and I would like to make him bring it
out with a footnote saying 'The proposer has just solved this
problem', but it doesn't look very likely.

Let me advertise Krull dimension of metric spaces. People keep saying
Krull dimension doesn't work except for weird Zariski spaces, because
all Hausdorff spaces have Krull dimension zero. But that is because
everybody has been defining Krull dimension wrong, until 1979. In 1979
Ram\'on Gali\'an gave a modified Krullian definition of dimension and
showed that it agrees with all definitions of dimension for separable
metric spaces. I gave an equivalent definition in 1985 and showed that
for all metric spaces, it's >= ind and <= dim. For all known examples,
it's equal to ind. (Metric examples.  For compact Hausdorff spaces
this is in a knotty area where Pasynkov has done something. See the
Sancho de Salases' paper (Juan and Maria Teresa) in Proc. AMS 105
(1989), 491--499; they don't cite Pasynkov, but they cite my 1985
paper, which does cite Pasynkov.)  But I called my definition 'by
Lebesgue or Krull, out of Menger-Urysohn'.  The main problem was my
being brainwashed; they tell you for thirty years that this silly
definition copied from algebra is topological Krull dimension, and if
you aren't careful you believe it. In fact, Gali\'an had the
definition right:

The Krull dimension of a topological space is defined as the minimum
dimension of any lattice of open sets which is a basis for the
space. The dimension of a lattice is what Krull said, the maximum
length of a chain of prime ideals. (A chain with two points has length
1, one link.)

In 1986, Juan Navarro Gonz\'alez sent me a copy of Gali\'an's paper
(incomplete, but all I have ever seen). So I asked him, "How do you
prove our definitions are equivalent?" And he said, "Why, you proved
it."  And you know? He was right. What none of us has said in print is
that of course this is how you transpose a definition of dimension
from algebra to topology. Is the inductive dimension one more than the
worst dimension of a boundary of a neighborhood? No, you take the best
neighborhoods. Is the covering dimension the order of a bad covering?
No, you take the best coverings you can get, get enough of. So for
Krull dimension, you take the best lattice of open sets you can get
enough of. (What the traditional definition actually uses is not prime
ideals of the lattice of all open sets but prime principal ideals;
that's different, but no better.)...  The problem is to determine
whether Krull dimension = inductive dimension for all metrizable
spaces. People have been working on it without knowing it, because
they've been trying to get into the gap between ind and dim and see
what's there. Prabir Roy proved more than thirty years ago that
there's a GAP there, and hardly any more is known now.

KDM: Do you have any plans for writing any more books?

ISBELL: Not bloody likely.


