Date: Sun, 16 May 1999 10:37:25 -0400
From: John Duskin <duskin@math.buffalo.edu>
Subject: categories: Illness of John Isbell

The many readers of the "Categories" list will be saddened to hear that our
friend and colleague and long time contributor to the list, John Isbell, is
critically ill in Millard Fillmore Hospital here in Buffalo, suffering from
a very serious blood infection. At present, his condition is stable, but
remains critical. His family and friends here in Buffalo know that you join
us in wishing him a speedy and complete recovery.


Date: Tue, 7 Sep 1999 13:50:42 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@barrs.org>
Subject: categories: Re: John Isbell 

I wrote to Jack Duskin and asked for news on Isbell.  This is his reply.
I very much regret that I think the John Isbell we all knew and respected
enormously is probably gone forever.  The person may still be there, but
the mathematician is probably not and that is what made him what he was.

Michael


---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Sat, 4 Sep 1999 10:14:21 -0400
From: John Duskin <duskin@math.buffalo.edu>
To: Michael Barr <barr@barrs.org>
Subject: Re: John Isbell

I saw John yesterday and for the first time it was clear that he recognized
me as soon as I walked in by greeting me by name. He is still very weak and
drifts in and out. There have been some setbacks, but on the whole, he is
still making progress. They hope to transfer him to rehab center near his
appartment as soon as he gets a little more strength. Keep your fingers
crossed! I will see him again on Sunday. Regards, Jack


Date: Wed, 8 Sep 1999 12:46:38 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@barrs.org>
Subject: categories: John Isbell

Jack writes me that I am being overly pessimistic and that people have
been in a coma for months, then in rehab for a year or more have fully
recovered.

May it come to pass.

Michael



Date: Wed, 8 Sep 1999 13:10:21 -0400 (EDT)
From: Michael Barr <barr@barrs.org>
Subject: categories: John Isbell (fwd)

Jack has asked me to post the following:


---------- Forwarded message ----------
Date: Wed, 8 Sep 1999 10:48:12 -0400
From: John Duskin <duskin@math.buffalo.edu>
To: Michael Barr <barr@barrs.org>
Subject: John Isbell

Mike perhaps you could post this to the net as a reply to your , I feel,
overly pessimistic view of John's condition:


	Mike, your pessimistic view of John's condition is not shared by
those of us who have seen him in Buffalo. People who have been in a
prolonged coma may take months to return to normal functioning and even
then require equally long periods of rehabilitation. René Lavendhomme told
me this summer about his experience and mental confusion after a prolonged
coma..."and then I even had to re-learn to walk!". People who know him now
would never know that he had had such a terrible experience. I hope that
that will be the case with John as well. Knowing him I can well imagine him
quoting Mark Twain to us: " The reports of my demise have been greatly
exaggerated."


Date: Fri, 22 Oct 1999 18:31:50 -0400
From: John Duskin <duskin@math.buffalo.edu>
Subject: categories: John Isbell's Progress

	I thought many on the list might like to know about John 
Isbell's remarkable progress even over the last weekend. He is 
regaining bodily strength rapidly. More importantly, he is beginning 
to read again with some pleasure, and to converse and write (!) with 
his usual intelligence and precision.
	And wit: Yesterday, I tried to help him move to a more 
comfortable position but did not succeed and remarked, "Close but no 
cigar!". He immediately asked if I had heard about a reporter's 
interview with Clinton's other tell- all friend, Gennifer Flowers. I 
hadn't. Seems she was asked if her relationship with the president 
had been like that of Miss Lewinski. The reply was, "Close, but no 
cigar".
	Best regards, Jack
P.S. If any one wants to contact John by e-mail, for the moment, just 
sent it to me and note that it is for him. I will make sure that he 
gets it.

