Date: Tue, 19 Mar 1996 20:59:52 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Category theoretic reflection principles? 

Date: Tue, 19 Mar 1996 12:42:22 GMT
From: Ralph Loader <loader@maths.ox.ac.uk>

Are there any categorical analogues of the reflection principles of set
theory?  I couldn't find any in the texts I have, or in the MathSci index.

These can be used to axiomatise ZF, and it should be possible to translate
them into category theory in a reasonably nice way, so as to give a
category theoretic account of ZF that is independent of such things as
elements.

Below is an account of how I think this could be done; my knowledge of the
category theory required is sadly lacking in places, suggestions and
criticism are very welcome.

(1) What are the reflection principles of set-theory.

Formal statement: let phi(x) be a first-order formula of set theory.  Then
the following is a theorem of ZF:

for all x, there exists an ordinal alpha such that (a) x in V_alpha and (b)
for all y in V_alpha, phi(y) iff 'phi(y) holds in V_alpha'.

'phi(y) holds in V_alpha' means the formula obtained by restricting all
quantifiers in phi to the set V_alpha (the V_alpha present the universe of
ZF as a union of an increasing sequence of sets). [By coding trickery, it
doesn't make any difference if we allow several formula with several free
variables to be reflected in the same V_alpha.  For our purposes, it's
useful to take alpha to be a limit ordinal, so that V_alpha gives a topos.]

In other words, the universe of ZF has lots of sub-universes that "look
just like" the original universe, where "looks just like" can be measured
by any particular formula phi.  [A more "dynamic" intuitive way of looking
at this is having constructed a universe V of set theory, we can take V to
be a set, and build a new universe V' containing it; in this new universe
V', the V_alpha required is the original V.]

(2) How do we translate these into category theory?

More specifically, take our universe to be a topos E.  How can we state a
reflection principle in E without reference to such things as the "V_alpha"
that seem fairly hideous monsters to a category theorist (even better would
be to get rid of first order formulae, also).

Presumably, we want to replace the V_alpha with an internal category C of
some sort, and then replace "x in V_alpha" with "x is an object of the
externalisation of C".  The statement "for all y, phi(y) iff 'phi(y) holds
in V_alpha'" can be replaced by that the externalisation of C is a
subcategory of E, and that the embedding preserves various things,
including the formula phi.  [My scant knowledge of such thing as
externalisations comes from Phoa's notes on fibrations, topos theory, the
effective topos and modest sets.  Apologies if I use terminology specific
to those notes.]

The V_alpha give subcategories of the universe of ZF in a fairly strong
sense, but I think it's enough to have C an internal category, such that
the externalisation of C is a full subcategory of E, in an appropriate
fibrational sense.  [This is probably far more than is needed].  The tricky
bit appears to be to get the notion of the inclusion preserving phi(x)
right.  I think that just taking phi(x) to be an arbitrary formulae of the
first order language of categories should be sufficient.  There are very
likely problems with differences between satisfaction in C and satisfaction
in its externalisation, but I'm ignoring this (fingers crossed).  Perhaps
the formulae phi could be replaced by finite sketches in an appropriate
manner (cf. Barr & Well's book), so as to get rid of logic, as well as set
theory.

I think we end up with something like the following definition:

A topos E "has reflection" if: for all finite sets {phi_i(x,y,z,...)} of
formula of the first order language of category theory, and objects/arrows
(as appropriate) a,b,c,... of E there are:

(a) an internal category C in E.

(b) a functor F embedding the externalisation of C (a fibration over E)
into the usual fibration of E^{arrow} over E.  This functor should be at
least full and faithful [maybe F needs to be defined in some natural way].

such that the following hold:

(c) a,b,c,... are in the image of F.

(d) For any I, and x,y,z,... in the fibre of the externalisation of C over
I, a formula phi_i(x,y,z,...) [from our finite set] should hold if and only
if phi_i(Fx,Fy,Fz,...) holds in the fibre of E^{arrow} over I.

Whew!  Does this make any sense at all?  I hope so, but I wouldn't be
surprised if it didn't.

(3) Let's do a sanity check to see if our definition looks anything like
the reflection principle of ZF.

V_alpha certainly generates a subfibration of the fibration of V over
itself.  There's a slight problem with the fibres over I where I is not in
V_alpha, in that the morphisms of that fibration won't generally be in
V_alpha.  However, I don't think that's a problem: since Set is well
pointed, hopefully we can restrict to the fibre over a singleton (?), and
which reduces us to the situation of V_alpha being a subcategory of V.
That the inclusion of V_alpha in V is full is essentially just the fact
that V_alpha is closed under cartesian products (for alpha a limit) and
subsets, so if A,B are in V_alpha, then the functions from A to B are also
in V_alpha.

The statement that phi holds in V_alpha if and only if it holds in V seems
to be the same, at least after translating a formula of category theory
into a formula of set-theory (morphisms are sets of ordered pairs etc.)  So
things don't look too bad.

That the language of set-theory has much more than category theory (under
this translation) tempts us to make C an internal topos, but this isn't
needed:

Lemma (I hope).  Let E be a topos with reflection.  Then E has an internal
topos.

Proof.  The statement that something is an elementary topos is well,
elementary, and finitely axiomatised (terminal object, pull-backs, cartesian
closed, subobject-classifier).  Apply reflection to the appropriate
sentences of first order logic axiomatising toposes.  Since they are true
in E, they are also true in the appropriate C, and thus we get an internal
topos.  Oh, better make this non-trivial (assuming that E is non-trivial),
"there is an arrow which isn't an iso".

Lemma.  This internal topos can be taken to be a full sub-topos of E in
some appropriate sense.

Proof.  As above, but also reflect the formulae "(f',g') is the pull-back of
f and g", "x is a terminal object", "tau: x --> omega is a sub-object
classifier" etc.

O.k., how about this:

Lemma (fingers crossed).  Let E be a non-trivial topos with reflection.
Then E has a natural numbers object.

Proof (very sketchy).

Let C be a non-trivial internal topos, as above.  We know that a (internal)
topos has coproducts.  Therefore we can generate a minimal subobject (in E)
N of C that (i) contains the initial object of C, (ii) is closed under x
|--> x+1 (the coproduct with the terminal object, in C).  Hopefully it's
not too hard to show that x|-->x+1 and 0 give N isomorphic to N+1 (in E),
which along with minimality gives us a natural numbers object.  [I've
entirely glossed over the non-uniqueness of co-products etc., I think this
can be made good by a quotient.]

(4)  Why should anyone be bothered with all this stuff?

(i) Hopefully it should give a nice topos-theoretic account of ZF,
independent of anything about elements etc.

(ii) The main application of reflection principles that I know of, outside
of set-theory, is category theory.  This makes (i) a little more important.
The reason is that reflection principles give us a nice, and very general,
way of working around small/large issues, which are normally glossed over
in category theory texts.  [This is not a criticism---category theory is
about category theory, not "limitation of size".  But it would be nice to
put it on a sound category theoretic basis.]

An example.  In Mac Lane and Moerdijk, page 12, it is stated that

  "In general we shall not be very explicit about set-theoretic
  foundations, and we shall tacitly assume that we are working in
  some fixed universe U of sets.  Members of U are called small sets,
  whereas a collection of members of U which does not itself belong
  to U will sometimes be referred to as a large set."

For concreteness, I'll assume that U is the universe of
ZF; although the following remarks seem in principle to be independent of
this.

On M&M, page 182, we have

  Corollary 4.  All toposes E have finite colimits.

So, having verified that the category Set^C of presheaves over some C^{op}
is a topos, we are justified in deducing that Set^C is also has finite
colimits?  Not quite.  The problem is that the proof M&M give of corollary
4 really only applies to small toposes; looking at the proof given, it uses
too much in the way of large functors etc. to apply directly to large
toposes.

Now, we could work around this directly; by replacing the argument for
corol. 4 given with an elementary one using diagram chasing.  This in
principle possible, at least for this result; both M&M and Johnstone give
examples (initial object and coequalisers) that should suffice to convince
all but the most strong-hearted that in general this would not be
desirable.  It also not "modular"---in the sense that a mathematician from
another field wishes to do this, (s)he has to learn enough about monads
etc. to actually carry this out.

Another possibility, is to use the completeness theorem from logic---since
the result is elementary, and has a proof for small toposes, it has an
elementary proof, and thus can be carried out in a large topos.  This is
unsatisfactory for several reasons (a) it only works for theorems; if
corol. 4 was merely a conjecture, or the hypothesis of an argument, then
the technique doesn't work [this is a slight over-simplification]. (b) it
depends on the logic of the universe U being classical, or at least being
formalised in such a way that a completeness result holds.  (c) it is not a
formalisable method; if you have a recursively axiomatised logic, including
arithmetic, in which this method can be formalised, then using Godel's
incompleteness theorem, it is possible to show that the logic is
inconsistent.

O.k., so a quick proof of

Corollary 5.  Let E be a large topos.  E has finite colimits.

Proof.  Let d be a finite diagram in E.  Apply the reflection principle
simultaneously to the formulae

"E is a topos"

and

"The finite diagram x has a colimit".

We now get a small sub-universe V (containing d) internal to which "E is a
topos" holds.  It is trivial (bounded formulae) to verify that the two
formulae above are absolute, in the sense that they are independent of the
universe they are interpreted in.  Thus "The diagram d has a colimit in E"
holds internally to the universe V, using corollary 4, and thus d has a
colimit in E.

(5) The other direction?  Construct a model of ZF from a topos E with
    reflection.

Should be possible.  The main things would be to construct, using
reflection, the cumulative hierarchy indexed by an arbitrary well-founded
relation in E.  Taking an appropriate "directed limit" (this would need to
be done outside of E, as if E had the colimit, presumably one could recover
the Burali-Forti paradox.) should give us the required universe.

Anyway, this is far too long.  Once again, comments welcome, even if it's
to tell me where I'm talking nonsense.

Ralph Loader.

