Date: Wed, 20 Jan 1999 14:56:56 -0400 (AST)
From: TAC <tac@mta.ca>
Subject: categories: TAC 1998 contents

[note from moderator: it is quite possible that as result of a labour
dispute at Mount Allison University the categories list may be dormant for
an undetermined period. I will attempt to let you know and provide
alternate access to the list if this happens; thanks for your patience.
regards to all, Bob]

Here is the table of contents and associated information for Theory and
Applications of Categories for 1998. The Editors solicit high quality
contributions. 


             THEORY AND APPLICATIONS OF CATEGORIES          ISSN 1201-561X


                      Volume 4, 1998


Pasting in multiple categories
Richard Steiner                                                          1

Protomodularity, descent and semidirect products
D. Bourn and G. Janelidze                                               37

A theory of enriched sketches
F. Borceux, C. Quinteiro and J. Rosicky                                 47

Simplicial and categorical diagrams, and their equivariant applications 
Rudolf Fritsch and Marek Golasinski                                     73

A 2-categorical approach to change of base and geometric morphisms II 
A.Carboni, G.M.Kelly, D.Verity and R.J.Wood                             82

The separated extensional Chu category 
Michael Barr                                                           137

Applications of Peiffer pairings in the Moore complex of a simplicial
group
A. Mutlu and T. Porter                                                 148

Freeness Conditions for 2-Crossed Modules and Complexes
A. Mutlu and T. Porter                                                 174

Geometric Construction of the Levi-Civita Parallelism
Anders Kock                                                            195

On Generic Separable Objects
Robbie Gates                                                           174

Copyright 1998 The Editors of Theory and Applications of Categories

THEORY AND APPLICATIONS OF CATEGORIES   (ISSN 1201-561X)
will disseminate articles
that significantly advance the study of categorical algebra or methods, or
that make significant new contributions to mathematical science using
categorical methods. The scope of the journal includes: all areas of
pure category theory, including higher dimensional categories; applications
of category theory to algebra, geometry and topology and other areas of
mathematics; applications of category theory to computer science, physics
and other mathematical sciences; contributions to scientific knowledge
that make use of categorical methods.
 
Articles appearing in the journal have been carefully and critically
refereed under the responsibility of members of the Editorial Board.
Only papers judged to be both significant and excellent are accepted for
publication.
 
The method of distribution of the journal is via the Internet tools
WWW/ftp. The journal is archived electronically and in
printed paper format.
 
 
Subscription information:

Individual subscribers receive (by e-mail) abstracts of articles
as they are published. Full text of published articles is available
in .dvi and Postscript format. Details will be e-mailed to new
subscribers and are available by tt WWW/ftp. To subscribe,
send e-mail to tac@mta.ca including a full name and postal
address.
For institutional subscription, send enquiries to the Managing Editor,
Robert Rosebrugh,  rrosebrugh@mta.ca.
 
Information for authors:

The typesetting language of the journal is TeX, and LaTeX is the preferred
flavour. TeX source of articles for publication should be submitted by
e-mail directly to an appropriate Editor.  They are listed below.  Please
obtain detailed information on submission format and style files from the
journal's WWW server at URL 
http://www.tac.mta.ca/tac/
or by anonymous ftp from
ftp.tac.mta.ca
in the directory  pub/tac/info.
You may also write to tac@mta.ca to receive details by e-mail.
 
Editorial board:

John Baez, University of California, Riverside:  
baez@math.ucr.edu 

Michael Barr, McGill University:
barr@triples.math.mcgill.ca 

Lawrence Breen, Universite de Paris 13:
breen@math.univ-paris13.fr 

Ronald Brown, University of North Wales:
r.brown@bangor.ac.uk 

Jean-Luc Brylinski, Pennsylvania State University:
jlb@math.psu.edu 

Aurelio Carboni, Universita dell Insubria:
carboni@fis.unico.it 

P. T. Johnstone, University of Cambridge:
ptj@pmms.cam.ac.uk 

G. Max Kelly, University of Sydney:
kelly_m@maths.usyd.edu.au 

Anders Kock, University of Aarhus:
kock@imf.au.dk 

F. William Lawvere, State University of New York at Buffalo:
wlawvere@acsu.buffalo.edu 

Jean-Louis Loday, Universit e de Strasbourg:
loday@math.u-strasbg.fr 

Ieke Moerdijk, University of Utrecht:
moerdijk@math.ruu.nl 

Susan Niefield, Union College:
niefiels@union.edu 

Robert Pare, Dalhousie University:
pare@mscs.dal.ca 

Andrew Pitts, University of Cambridge:
ap@cl.cam.ac.uk 

Robert Rosebrugh, Mount Allison University:
rrosebrugh@mta.ca 

Jiri Rosicky, Masaryk University:
rosicky@math.muni.cz 

James Stasheff, University of North Carolina:
jds@charlie.math.unc.edu 

Ross Street, Macquarie University:
street@macadam.mpce.mq.edu.au 

Walter Tholen, York University:
tholen@mathstat.yorku.ca 

Myles Tierney, Rutgers University:
tierney@math.rutgers.edu 

Robert F. C. Walters, University of Sydney:
walters_b@maths.usyd.edu.au 

R. J. Wood, Dalhousie University:
rjwood@mscs.dal.ca 

 
