Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 04:00:34 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Algebraic structures for Eilenberg-Moore algebras 

Date: Wed, 01 Feb 1995 11:51:57 +0000
From: Andrea Schalk <Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk>


I'm looking for some pointer to literature where I can find the
following (or a similar) Theorem:

Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a monad. Assume we have an algebraic structure
such that every free algebra for that monad carries one of those
algebraic structures and such that all morphisms of the form $Tf$ 
and all $\mu_C$ preserve it. Then all Eilenberg-Moore algebras carry
such a structure and all morphisms between them preserve it.

Thanks

Andrea Schalk
University of Cambridge
Computer Lab

Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk


Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 04:02:08 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Annonce 

Date: Wed, 1 Feb 95 16:50:02 +0100
From: Monique Mathieu <momathie@mathp7.jussieu.fr>

JOURNEES D'ETUDE SUR LES ESQUISSES
(Deuxieme annonce)


organisees par

P.Damphousse (Lab. math. Tours)
R. Guitart (Eq.Theo. Geom., Paris 7)
C. Lair (Eq. Cat. et Structures, Paris 7)


UNIVERSITE PARIS 7
2 place Jussieu Paris 75005

Lundi 6 fevrier et mardi 7 fevrier 1995
9h-12h40 & 14h30-18h10
(salle 517, tours 55-56)


Lundi 6 fevrier
9h : C. LAIR, Presentations diagrammatiques des theories : esquisses, trames
et patchworks ...
10h20 : L. COPPEY, Esquisses et types, I.
11h40 : R. GUITART, P-esquisses.

14h30 : J. ROSICKY, Finitary and geometric sketches.
15h50 : C. LAIR, Proprietes generales des categories esquissables : diagrammes localement libres et permanence de formes.
17h10 : R. GUITART, Construction effective des diagrammes localement libres.


Mardi 7 fevrier
9h : L. COPPEY, Esquisses et types, II.
10h20 : J. ROSICKY, Sketches and accessible categories.
11h40 : C. LAIR, Caracterisations intrinseques des categories esquissables : catgories modelables et catgories analysables.

14h30 : M. MATHIEU, Esquissabilite et monadicite.
15h50 : C. LAIR, Proprietes particulieres de certaines categories esquissables :
exemples de traduction syntaxe-semantique et autres phenomenes de traduction.



Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 22:59:55 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Algebraic structures for Eilenberg-Moore algebras 

Date: Thu, 2 Feb 95 08:39:39 EST
From: Michael Barr <barr@triples.math.mcgill.ca>

- 
- Date: Wed, 01 Feb 1995 11:51:57 +0000
- From: Andrea Schalk <Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk>
- 
- 
- I'm looking for some pointer to literature where I can find the
- following (or a similar) Theorem:
- 
- Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a monad. Assume we have an algebraic structure
- such that every free algebra for that monad carries one of those
- algebraic structures and such that all morphisms of the form $Tf$ 
- and all $\mu_C$ preserve it. Then all Eilenberg-Moore algebras carry
- such a structure and all morphisms between them preserve it.
- 
- Thanks
- 
- Andrea Schalk
- University of Cambridge
- Computer Lab
- 
- Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk
- 
- 
I don't know of an explicit reference, but things of this sort are
certainly familiar.  Look, for example, at the proof in TTT that
toposes are cartesian closed.  For that matter, the proof that a
slice of a topos is a topos uses the same idea.

Michael Barr


Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 23:03:30 -0400 (AST)
Subject: re Algebraic structures for Eilenberg-Moore algebras 

Date: Thu, 02 Feb 1995 11:27:38 -0500 (EST)
From: MTHISBEL@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu

  ''From: Andrea Schalk <Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk>


I'm looking for some pointer to literature where I can find the
following (or a similar) Theorem:

Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a monad. Assume we have an algebraic structure
such that every free algebra for that monad carries one of those
algebraic structures and such that all morphisms of the form $Tf$
and all $\mu_C$ preserve it. Then all Eilenberg-Moore algebras carry
such a structure and all morphisms between them preserve it.

Thanks''

   I don't know where to look for such a theorem but would be more optimistic
if I knew what 'carries' means. Harvey Friedman published something of this
tendency about 1977, I think with semantic hypothesis and syntactic 
conclusion.  John Isbell


Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 23:08:33 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Chair in Theoretical Computer Science at The University of Edinburgh 

Date: Thu, 2 Feb 1995 19:39:22 +0000
From: Gordon Plotkin <gdp@dcs.ed.ac.uk>

The University of Edinburgh
Chair in Theoretical Computer Science

The University invites applications for a newly established Chair in
Theoretical Computer Science, to be held within the Department of
Computer Science.  We seek a candidate who will further develop the
strengths of the Department and its Laboratory for Foundations of
Computer Science (LFCS).

In addition to outstanding strength in research and scholarship, the
successful candidate should provide leadership and inspiration for
fundamental research, encourage the integration of his/her own
research with that of others, and play an active role in teaching
and departmental administration.

The appointment is full-time, the salary will be within the normal
professorial salary range and the person appointed will be required to
retire at the end of the academic year in which he/she reaches the age
of 65.

Application Procedure

Letters of application should include a curriculum vitae, and the
names and addresses of 3 referees. Please include fax numbers for
referees if possible.  Applications should be addressed to the
Secretary to the University, University of Edinburgh, and sent, to
arrive not later than 31st March 1995, by post (1 Roxburgh Street,
Edinburgh, EH8 9TB, Scotland, UK), or fax +44 (0)131 650 6509.  The
taking up of references is selective and does not imply a decision
that the applicant will be placed on the final short-list for
interview.

Further particulars may be obtained from our WWW page,
http://www.dcs.ed.ac.uk

or from the Head of Department,
Prof Roland N. Ibbett
Department of Computer Science
tel: +44 (0)131 650 5119
e-mail: hod@dcs.ed.ac.uk

NOTE: This advertisement does not constitute a contract of employment
and does not in any way override the terms of any contract of
employment which may be issued subsequently to the successful
candidate.

The University reserves the right to make an appointment from outwith
those candidates who have submitted formal applications.




Date: Sun, 5 Feb 1995 20:36:16 -0400 (AST)
Subject: query of A. Schalk

Date: Sat, 4 Feb 95 09:26:05 EST
From: Ernie Manes <manes@math.umass.edu>

February 3, 1995
  To:  Andrea Schalk, Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk
From:  Ernie Manes, manes@math.umass.edu
  Re:  Your query yesterday on cat-dist

The question you asked was solved in my 1967 thesis and appears as 
Exercise 9 on page 217 of my book on Algebraic Theories, Springer-Verlag
GTM 28, 1976 where the reference to the thesis is also given.

In effect, if T is your monad and C is the category of algebraic 
structures, you give yourself a functor  J : F ---> C  where F is the
full subcategory of free T-algebras.  This is because a typical 
homomorphism between free T-algebras has the form of a composition Tf
followed by a mu.  Your question then amounts to asking for a canonical
extension of J to the category of all T-algebras.  This construction,
based on contractible coequalizers, is given in the references cited in 
the first paragraph.

     All the best,
     egm



Date: Sun, 5 Feb 1995 20:38:22 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Algebraic structures for Eilenberg-Moore algebras 

Date: Fri, 3 Feb 1995 15:52:31 +0000 (GMT)
From: Dusko Pavlovic <D.Pavlovic@doc.ic.ac.uk>

According to categories:
 > 
 > Date: Wed, 01 Feb 1995 11:51:57 +0000
 > From: Andrea Schalk <Andrea.Schalk@cl.cam.ac.uk>
 > 
 > 
 > I'm looking for some pointer to literature where I can find the
 > following (or a similar) Theorem:
 > 
 > Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a monad. Assume we have an algebraic structure
 > such that every free algebra for that monad carries one of those
 > algebraic structures and such that all morphisms of the form $Tf$ 
 > and all $\mu_C$ preserve it. Then all Eilenberg-Moore algebras carry
 > such a structure and all morphisms between them preserve it.
 > 

Manes' book "Algebraic Theories" contains many propositions and
exercises of this kind, relating monadic and equational presentations
of algebraic theories. I think something of this kind should be there.

Regards,
-- Dusko Pavlovic


Date: Sun, 5 Feb 1995 20:40:59 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Re: Algebraic structures for Eilenberg-Moore algebras 

Date: Fri, 3 Feb 1995 16:44:33 +0000 (GMT)
From: Dusko Pavlovic <D.Pavlovic@doc.ic.ac.uk>

 > 
 > Let $(T,\eta,\mu)$ be a monad. Assume we have an algebraic structure
 > such that every free algebra for that monad carries one of those
 > algebraic structures and such that all morphisms of the form $Tf$ 
 > and all $\mu_C$ preserve it. Then all Eilenberg-Moore algebras carry
 > such a structure and all morphisms between them preserve it.
 > 

PS On a second thought, the matter of monadic vs. equational
presentation just complicates things here. If we begin by presenting
this algebraic structure, carried by all free T-algebras, as another
monad, say (S,\eta,\mu), the proof boils down to two diagrams.

The assumption that each free T-algebra is an S-algebra means that
there is a natural transformation s:ST->T: its components are the
given S-algebras on TX; the assumption that each Tf preserves the
structure is just the naturality of s.

On the other hand, the assumption that \mu of T preserves it means
that \mu s = s S\mu. Using this and the naturalities, one directly
checks that if a:TX->X is a T-algebra, then
 	SX --S\eta--> STX --s--> TX --a--> X 
must be an S-algebra --- clearly preserved by T-morphisms.

All the best,
-- Dusko


	


Date: Sun, 5 Feb 1995 20:42:14 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Workshop on Descent Theory 

Date: Fri, 3 Feb 95 16:19:05 +1100
From: Walter Tholen <tholen_w@maths.su.oz.au>

Dear Colleagues:
This is to inform you that we recently received approval for a workshop on
                      "Descent Theory",
to be held September 17 - 23, 1995, at the Mathematical Research Institute
in Oberwolfach, Germany. It will be a specialized meeting with the aim to
bring together people actively working on different aspects of descent
theory. Unfortunately we got only a small portion of the space at Oberwol-
fach, which means that this workshop can host only about 25 participants.
It will therefore be a very small venture, not at all intended to compete
with the more general conferences on category theory to be held in July
and August in Halifax and in Cambridge, respectively. Following the usual
Oberwolfach procedure, the Institute will sent out invitations for the
meeting soon.
Regards,
         George Janelidze      Ieke Moerdijk     Walter Tholen.


Date: Tue, 7 Feb 1995 01:52:59 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Higher-dimensional algebra and TQFT 

Date: Sun, 5 Feb 95 19:53:07 PST
From: john baez <baez@math.ucr.edu>

The paper "Higher-dimensional algebra and topological
quantum field theory", by John Baez and James Dolan,
is now available by anonymous ftp as the file

baez/tqft.tex

from 

math.ucr.edu

It is in LaTeX, but to LaTeX it you also need the files
auxdefs.sty and diagram.sty, which are also in the directory
baez.

Here's an abstract:

The study of topological quantum field theories  increasingly
relies upon concepts from higher-dimensional algebra such as
n-categories and n-vector spaces.   We review progress
towards a definition of n-category suited for this purpose, and
outline a program in which n-dimensional TQFTs are to be
described as n-category representations.   First we describe a
`suspension' operation on n-categories, and hypothesize that
the k-fold suspension of a weak n-category stabilizes for k
greater than or equal to n + 2.  We give evidence for this 
hypothesis and describe its relation to stable homotopy theory. 
We then propose a description of n-dimensional unitary extended
TQFTs as weak n-functors from the `free stable weak n-category
with duals on one object' to the n-category of `n-Hilbert spaces'.
We conclude by describing n-categorical generalizations of
deformation quantization and the quantum double construction.



Date: Tue, 7 Feb 1995 02:05:21 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Kleisli category for multiple monads? 

Date: Mon, 6 Feb 1995 14:07:19 -0500
From: David Espinosa <espinosa@cs.columbia.edu>



Is it possible to form the Kleisli category of several monads at once?
I can imagine an indexed product of the individual Kleisli categories,
but I lack the technical facility to describe it.

In my thesis, I have a category with multiple monads, relating the
different "levels" of a denotational semantics (environments, stores,
etc).  See http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~espinosa/ for more info.

The monad laws follow easily from the Kleisli formulation; they say
that the Kleisli category is actually a category.  The monad morphism
laws say that an arrow between monads is a functor between Kleisli
categories.  What I expect from a "multi-Kleisli" formulation is that
Kleisli compositions associate (when possible).

Specifically, given monads P and PQ (where Q is another functor) and
arrows

	f : A  -> PQB
	g : QB -> PQC
	h : C  -> PQD

we'd like

	(oPQ (oP f g) h) = (oP f (oPQ g h))

where oP and oPQ are the Kleisli compositions of the monads.

I can postulate a category with this structure, but it would be nicer
if it came from a general construction.

David

--------------------

p.s. Other formulations of associativity are:

	;; bindT : TA * (A -> TB) -> TB

	f : A  -> PQB
	g : QB -> PQC

	(bindP (bindPQ pqa f) g) 
	  = (bindPQ pqa (lambda (a) (bindP (f a) g)))


	;; mapT  : (A -> B) * TA -> TB
	;; joinT : TTA -> TA

	;; f : A  -> PQB
	;; g : QB -> PQC

	(joinP (mapP g (joinPQ (mapPQ f pqa))))
	  = (joinPQ (mapPQ (lambda (a) (joinP (mapP g (f a)))) pqa))

	Can we rewrite this using join in a more natural way?



Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 02:07:34 -0400 (AST)
Subject: eye has not seen 

Date: Thu, 9 Feb 1995 09:51:17 +0500
From: James Stasheff <jds@math.unc.edu>

Have anyone ever seen the odd numbered pages of Pareigis'
Endomorphism bialgebras of diagrams...
apparently its part of a book
has the book ever appeared??



Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 02:10:04 -0400 (AST)
Subject: The Tbilisi Symposium on Language, Logic and Computation 

Date: Thu, 09 Feb 95 18:23:42 +0000
From: tbilisi@cogsci.edinburgh.ac.uk


First Call For Papers


The Tbilisi Symposium on Language, Logic and Computation
--------------------------------------------------------

Tbilisi, Republic of Georgia
October 19-22, 1995
   
Host institution: Tbilisi State University
Dedicated to Solomon Dodashvili
 
In order to foster communication between researchers in the Republic of
Georgia and the international research community, the Georgian Centre for
Language and Speech, based at the Tbilisi State University, will host an
international symposium on language, logic and computation in 19-22, October
1995. The Tbilisi Symposium is anticipated to be the first of a regular
series.


TOPICS OF INTEREST:

The Tbilisi Symposium will welcome papers on current research in all aspects
of language, logic and computation, including but not limited to:

* natural language semantics/pragmatics 
* dynamic and modal logic
* quantified extensions of modal systems and intermediate logics:
  semantical and computational aspects
* information oriented logical frameworks: domain
  theory, linear logic, situation theory
* natural language parsing and generation
* machine translation and translation aids
* statistics and language processing
* automated deduction and logic programming
* lambda and combinatory calculi
* process algebra
* category theory in computer science


INVITED SPEAKERS:

R. Cooper (Edinburgh)        
P. Gardenfors (Lund)       
A. Joshi (Philadelphia)
H. Ono (Ishikawa)
A. Preller (Montpelier)
H. Uszkoreit (Saarbruecken)
R. Wojcicki (Warszawa)     


PROGRAMME COMMITTEE:

J. van Benthem (Amsterdam) 
J. Bergstra (Amsterdam)    
P.L. Curien (Paris) 
G. Erbach (Saarbruecken)
L. Esakia (Tbilisi)
T. Fernando (Stuttgart)
H. Ganzinger (Saarbruecken)
J. Ginzburg (Edinburgh)
D. de Jongh (Amsterdam)
E. Klein  (Edinburgh)
Z. Khasidashvili (Norwich) (Co-chair)
E. Khmaladze (Tbilisi)
J.-J. Levy (Rocquencourt)  (Co-chair)
A. Mikheev (Edinburgh)
S. Peters (Stanford)
K. Segerberg (Stockholm)
E. Vallduvi (Edinburgh)   


PROCEEDINGS:

The papers will be refereed and a selection will appear as a book published by
the Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford.


SUBMISSION DETAILS:

Papers not exceeding 10-pages should be submitted electronically or, if
electronic submission is problematic, in hard copy. Electronic submissions
should be in plain text, latex, or ready-to-print postscript.  Papers
submitted by postal mail should be accompanied by 3 additional copies. No fax
submissions.

Papers should be accompanied by a two-page abstract. The abstract should also
include the full postal and e-mail address and fax/phone of the author (or a
designated contact author in case of joint papers), as well as a specification
of the topic area. These abstracts will be collated together and will be made
available to all symposium participants.

Papers should be submitted to:

The Tbilisi Symposium                        E-mail: tbilisi@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
Human Communication Research Centre          Phone:  +44 131 650 4667
University of Edinburgh                      Fax:    +44 131 650 4587
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW
Scotland, UK


SCHEDULE:

Authors must submit their 10-page papers by 31 May 1995.  Notification of
receipt will be mailed to the (contact) author.  Authors will be notified of
acceptance by 15 July 1995. The deadline for submission of final versions of
the presented papers will be 31 October 1995. Papers will undergo review and
a selection will be published in the proceedings. We expect the proceedings to
appear in the first half of 1996. Final submission details will be sent along
with the symposium materials.


ORGANISING COMMITTEE:

J. Ginzburg (Co-Chair)                 E. Vallduvi (Co-Chair)
Human Communication Research Centre    Centre for Cognitive Science
University of Edinburgh                University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place                      2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW                      Edinburgh EH8 9LW
Scotland                               Scotland
ginzburg@cogsci.ed.ac.uk               enric@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
Phone: +44-131-650-4627                Phone: +44-131-650-4451
Fax:   +44-131-650-4587                Fax:   +44-131-650-4587

Z. Khasidashvili (Programme Co-Chair)  J.-J. Levy (Programme Co-chair) 
School of Information Systems          INRIA Rocquencourt,
University of East Anglia              Domaine de Voluceau,
Norwich NR4 7TJ                        B.P. 105, 78153 Le Chesney Cedex
England                                France
zurab@sys.uea.ac.uk                    Jean-Jacques.Levy@inria.fr
Phone: +44-1603-592607                 Phone: +33 1 39 63 56 44
Fax:   +44-1603-593344                 Fax:   +33 1 39 63 55 11.


LOCAL ORGANISING COMMITTEE:

Chair:       T. Khurodze (Vice-rector, TSU)             
Vicechair:   N. Chanishvili (Dept. of Modern Georgian, TSU);
Secretaries: R. Asatiani (Inst. of Oriental Studies, GAS);
             T. Sukhiashvili (Inst. of Cybern., GAS).

Georgian Academy of Sciences:
             M. Abashidze, R. Grigolia (Inst. of Cybern.);
             G. Tagviashvili (Inst. of Computational Math.);
             G. Chikoidze (Inst. of Control Systems);
             N. Amiridze (Inst. of Oriental Studies);
             T. Uturgaidze (Inst. of Linguistics);
             M. Bejanishvili (Inst. of Philosophy);
Tbilisi State University:
             J. Antidze, T. Kutsia (Inst. of Applied Math.);
             L. Mchedlishvili, N. Ivanidze (Dept. of Logics);
             L. Chkhaidze (Inst. Comp. Science and Telecommunication);


LOCATION:

The Republic of Georgia offers many singular attractions. Tbilisi is a
beautiful urban centre of Georgia, which is rich in architectural, historical,
and natural attractions. Tbilisi is easily accessible by plane from many major
European cities (e.g. several flights per week from Frankfurt, Istanbul,
Koeln, Paris, Prague, Thessaloniki, Vienna). There are also direct flights to
Tbilisi from Tel Aviv and Cairo.


SOLOMON DODASHVILI:

Solomon Dodashvili was a Professor at St. Petersburg University. He is the
author of a well-known tutorial book of logic, published by St. Petersburg
University in 1827. In 1995 Georgia will celebrate the 190th anniversary of his
birth. An excursion will be organised to the Kakheti region, where Dodashvili 
was born.

CONFERENCE INFORMATION:

This announcement (ascii, dvi and postcript formats) is available via
anonymous FTP from ftp.cogsci.ed.ac.uk in directory pub/tbilisi. Information
about flight schedules to Tbilisi is also available. For further information
contact the Edinburgh address above. Information on registration and
accommodation will appear in future announcements




Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 22:50:50 -0400 (AST)
Subject: WoLLIC '95 - Recife, Brazil 

Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 09:23:41 GMT
From: Ruy de Queiroz <R.deQueiroz@doc.ic.ac.uk>

			First Call for Contributions

	2nd Workshop on Logic, Language, Information and Computation
				WoLLIC '95
			    July 26--28, 1995
			      Recife, Brazil

The `2nd Workshop on Logic, Language, Information and Computation' (WoLLIC '95),
will be held in Recife, on the northeastern coast of Brazil, from 26th to 28th
July 1995.  Contributions are invited in the form of two page (600 words)
abstract in all areas related to logic, language, information and computation,
including: pure logical systems, proof theory, model theory, type theory,
category theory, constructive mathematics, lambda and combinatorial calculi,
program logic and program semantics, nonclassical logics, nonmonotonic logic,
logic and language, discourse representation, logic and AI, automated deduction,
foundations of logic programming, logic and computation, and logic engineering.

There will be a number of guest speakers, including (so far preliminarily
confirmed):
M. Abadi (Palo Alto), C. Alchourron (Buenos Aires), A. Avron (Tel Aviv),
N. Belnap (Pittsburgh), J. van Benthem (Amsterdam), P. Freyd (Philadelphia),
D. Gabbay (London), I. Hodkinson (London), P. Lincoln (Stanford),
V. Pratt (Stanford).

Submission: Two-page abstracts (preferably by e-mail to wollic95@di.ufpe.br)
must be RECEIVED by JUNE 1ST, 1995 by the Chair of the Organising Committee.
Authors will be notified of acceptance by July 1st, 1995.  WoLLIC '95 is
sponsored by the Interest Group in Pure and Applied Logics (IGPL) and The
European Association for Logic, Language and Information (FoLLI). Abstracts from
members of the IGPL will be published in the Bulletin of the IGPL
(ISSN 0945-9103) as part of the meeting report.  Selected contributed papers
will be invited for submission to a special issue of the Bulletin.

The location: Recife is the capital of the sun belt coast in the northeast
of Brazil, just 8 degrees below Equator, bathed by 250+ days of sun/year (i.e. 
Caribbean-like climate).  City population is around 2.5 million and the life
style is quite relaxed. Recife is over 450 years old, has a number of
interesting architectural samples of Portuguese colonial times (esp. XVII and
XVIII centuries), and is neighbour to picturesque Olinda, whose architectural
heritage is protected by UNESCO.

Programme Chair:
Prof P. A. S. Veloso, Departmento de Informatica, PUC-Rio, Rua Marques de Sao
Vicente, 225, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22453-900, Brazil, veloso@inf.puc-rio.br,
tel: +55 21 529 9524, fax: +55 21 511 5645.

Programme Committee:
W. A. Carnielli (UNICAMP, Campinas), M. Costa (EMBRAPA, Brasilia),
V. de Paiva (Cambridge, UK), R. de Queiroz (UFPE, Recife),
A. Haeberer (PUC, Rio), T. Pequeno (UFC, Fortaleza), L. C. Pereira (PUC, Rio),
A. M. Sette (UNICAMP, Campinas), P. Veloso (Chair, PUC, Rio).

For further information, contact the Chair of Organising Committee:
R. de Queiroz, Departamento de Informatica, Federal University of Pernambuco
(UFPE) at Recife, P.O. Box 7851, Recife, PE 50732-970, Brazil,
e-mail: wollic95@di.ufpe.br, tel: +55 81 271 8430, fax +55 81 271 4925.
(Co-Chair: T. Pequeno, LIA, UFC, tarcisio@lia1.ufc.br, fax +55 85 223-1333)



Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 22:52:54 -0400 (AST)
Subject: actes de CAEN 94 

Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 18:09:42 --100
From: Pierre Ageron <ageron@matin.math.unicaen.fr>


    (* This is to announce that the proceedings of the C.A.E.N. workshop,
which was held in September 1994, will soon be available to everybody who
is interested *)

   Les actes des journees CAEN 94 (Categories, Algebres, Esquisses,
Neo-esquisses) seront disponibles en principe a la fin du mois de fevrier
1995. 
  
   Ils comprennent des contributions originales, soigneusement relues et
corrigees, des auteurs suivants : DEHORNOY, PORTER, DUVAL et REYNAUD,
LAFONT, JOHNSTONE, DRECKMANN, VAN DE WIELE, GERNER et GUITART, GUITART,
DAMPHOUSSE et GUITART, GORDON et POWER, SENECHAUD, LELLAHI, BOURN, AGERON,
BURRONI et PENON, WEHRUNG, BROWN, MATHIEU, LAIR, RETORE, STELL. La plupart
de ces articles sont en francais, les autres sont en anglais; ils
totalisent 142 pages. 
    
   Le volume d'actes sera envoye gratuitement a chaque personne qui en
fait la demande, ceci dans la limite du tirage prevu (un seul exemplaire
par personne ou bibliotheque). Il suffit pour cela de m'envoyer votre
commande par la poste, en indiquant clairement l'adresse a laquelle il
devra etre expedie. Les commandes faites par courrier electronique ne
seront pas prises en compte. Les auteurs n'ont bien evidemment pas a
passer commande. 

Pierre AGERON
Departement de Mathematiques
Universite de Caen
14032 CAEN Cedex
FRANCE




Date: Fri, 10 Feb 1995 22:56:53 -0400 (AST)
Subject: The recent question of Andrea Schalk, and replies to it. 

Date: Fri, 10 Feb 95 18:21:27 +1100
From: Max Kelly <kelly_m@maths.su.oz.au>


The best answer was that of Ernie Manes. What is at stake is one very 
simple observation: if A is the category of algebras for a monad (perhaps 
in the context of enriched category theory) and F is the full subcategory 
given by the free algebras, then F is dense in A, and moreover this density 
may be "presented" by coequalizers. For the meaning of "density presentation", 
a notion due to Brian Day, see p.172 of my book "Basic Concepts of Enriched
Category Theory", CUP 1982. Here it means that every algebra is a coequalizer 
of a pair of maps between free algebras, IN SUCH A WAY THAT this colimit is 
preserved by the representables A(f,-) where f is a free algebra; and this is
very easy to see. Now Thm 5.30 of my book gives a very simple proof that the
left Kan extension along J: F --> A of any functor T: F --> B exists, provided 
only that B has coequalizers. The observation of Dusko Pavlovic, that an 
elegant argument is to hand when B too is monadic, gives too SPECIAL a result. 
The others that have answered don't seem to have pointed out that the 
"canonical" extension of T they refer to IS indeed the left Kan extension.

Max Kelly.


Date: Wed, 15 Feb 1995 05:16:20 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Summer School on Semantics and Logic of Computation 

Date: Tue, 14 Feb 1995 08:55:49 +0000
From: Andrew Pitts <Andrew.Pitts@cl.cam.ac.uk>


		   A Newton Institute Summer School

		 SEMANTICS AND LOGICS OF COMPUTATION
		  
			25--29 September 1995
		   Newton Institute, Cambridge, UK

		      in collaboration with the
		       ESPRIT CLICS-II project

			Call for Registration

The Summer School on Semantics and Logics of Computation is being held
as part of a six-month research programme on Semantics of Computation
at the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, a new
international research centre in Cambridge UK. The Summer School is
sponsored by the CEC ESPRIT research project "Categorical Logic in
Computer Science, II" (CLICS-II). 

The aim is to present a number of modern developments in semantics and
logics of computation in a way that is accessible to graduate-level
students. Registrations from postgraduate students will be given
priority, but applications by interested academics and industrialists
are also welcomed. The planned courses include:

		    Samson Abramsky (Imperial) on
		      "Semantics of interaction"

		    Thierry Coquand (Chalmers) on
	      "Computational content of classical logic"

		    Martin Hofmann (Edinburgh) on
     "Dependent type theory: syntax, semantics, and applications"

		     Martin Hyland (Cambridge) on
			   "Game Semantics"

		      Eugenio Moggi (Genova) on
		"Computational types and applications"

	       Mogens Nielsen & Glynn Winskel (Aarhus)
		       "Models for concurrency"

		       Andrew Pitts (Cambridge)
    "Operationally-based theories for proving program properties"


ORGANIZERS:

For CLICS-II:			Peter Dybjer (Chalmers)
				peterd@cs.chalmers.se

For the NIMS Semantics of 	Andrew Pitts (Cambridge)
Computation Programme:		ap@cl.cam.ac.uk


LOCATION:

The workshop will take place in the Newton Institute's
purpose-designed building, in a pleasant area in the west of
Cambridge, about one mile from the centre of the City.  Accommodation
for participants will be provided next door to the Newton Institute
in the study bedrooms of Girton College's Wolfson Court. The
accommodation will be available from the evening of Sunday 24
September until the morning of Saturday 30 September.


FEES:

general rate: 400 pounds
student rate: 250 pounds

The fee covers registration, accommodation, meals (breakfast, lunch,
supper, tea & coffee breaks), and lecture materials.


REGISTRATION:  

There are only a limited number of places available on the Summer
School. Intending participants are advised to apply for registration
as soon as possible, and in no case later than 31 May 1995. To apply,
please send your name and address (including e-mail or fax number, if
available) to:

			Florence Leroy
			(SEM Summer School)
			Isaac Newton Institute
			20 Clarkson Road
			Cambridge CB3 0EH

			Tel: +44 1223 335984
			Fax: +44 1223 330508
			Email: f.leroy@newton.cam.ac.uk
 

IMPORTANT DATES:

Deadline for registration			31 May 1995
Arrival date					24 September 1995
Scientific programme				25--29 September 1995
Departure date					30 September 1995

---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Date: Wed, 15 Feb 1995 05:17:50 -0400 (AST)
Subject: LICS'95 Accepted Papers 

Date: Tue, 14 Feb 95 11:38 EST
From: Amy Felty <felty@research.att.com>


                                   Day 1
                                   =====

Program Logics
--------------

Completeness of Kozen's Axiomatisation of the Propositional $\mu$-Calculus,
  Igor Walukiewicz
Once and For All,
  Orna Bernholtz, Amir Pnueli
Complete Proof Systems for First Order Interval Temporal Logic,
  Bruno Dutertre

Finite Models I
---------------

The Infinitary Logic of Sparse Random Graphs,
  James F. Lynch, Jerzy Tyszkiewicz
Generalized Quantifiers and 0-1 Laws,
  Anuj Dawar, Erich Gr\"{a}del
Relativized Logspace and Generalized Quantifiers over Finite Structures,
  Georg Gottlob
First-order Queries on Finite Structures over the Reals,
  Jan Paredaens, Jan Van den Bussche, Dirk Van Gucht

Model Checking and Verification
-------------------------------

Model-Checking of Causality Properties,
  Rajeev Alur, Doron Peled, Wojciech Penczek
On the Complexity of Modular Model Checking,
  Moshe Y. Vardi
Timing Behavior Analysis for Real-Time Systems,
  Farn Wang
On the Verification Problem of Nonregular Properties for Nonregular Processes,
  Ahmed Bouajjani, Peter Habermehl, Rachid Echahed


                                   Day 2
                                   =====

Theorem Proving and AI
----------------------

Uniform Proofs and Disjunctive Logic Programming,
  Gopalan Nadathur, Donald W. Loveland
Structural Cut Elimination,
  Frank Pfenning
Paramodulation without Duplication,
  Christopher Lynch
Complexity of Normal Default Logic and Related Modes of Nonmonotonic Reasoning,
  V. Wiktor Marek, Anil Nerode, Jeffrey B. Remmel

Concurrency I
-------------

Control Structures,
  Alex Mifsud, Robin Milner, John Power
Configuration Structures,
  R. J. Van Glabbeek, G. D. Plotkin
A Typed Calculus of Synchronous Processes,
  Simon Gay, Rajagopal Nagarajan
Modal $\mu$-Types for Processes,
  Marino Miculan, Fabio Gadducci

Semantics I
-----------

Games and Full Abstraction for the Lazy $\lambda$-Calculus,
  Samson Abramsky, Guy McCusker
Games Semantics for Full Propositional Linear Logic,
  Fran\c{c}ois Lamarche
A Fully Abstract Semantics for a Concurrent Functional Language with Monadic
 Types,
  Alan Jeffrey


                                   Day 3
                                   =====

Lambda-Calculus and Types
-------------------------

Equality Between Functionals in the Presence of Coproducts,
  Daniel J. Dougherty, Ramesh Subrahmanyam
A Logic of Subtyping,
  Giuseppe Longo, Kathleen Milsted, Sergei Soloviev
Normalization and Extensionality,
  Adolfo Piperno
New Notions of Reduction and Non-Semantic Proofs of $\beta$-Strong
Normalization in Typed $\lambda$-Calculi,
  A. J. Kfoury, J. B. Wells

Finite Models II
----------------

Finitely Monotone Properties,
  Alexei P. Stolboushkin
Tree Canonization and Transitive Closure,
  Kousha Etessami, Neil Immerman
Ptime Canonization for Two Variables with Counting,
  Martin Otto
When Do Fixed Point Logics Capture Complexity Classes?,
  Anil Seth

Unification and Rewriting
-------------------------

Higher-Order Unification via Explicit Substitutions,
  Gilles Dowek, Th\'{e}r\`{e}se Hardin, Claude Kirchner
Sequentiality, Second Order Monadic Logic and Tree Automata,
  Hubert Comon
Orderings, AC-Theories and Symbolic Constraint Solving,
  Hubert Comon, Robert Nieuwenhuis, Albert Rubio


                                   Day 4
                                   =====

Model Checking II
-----------------

Efficient On-the-Fly Model Checking for $CTL^{*}$,
  Girish Bhat, Rance Cleaveland, Orna Grumberg
Partial Model Checking,
  Henrik Reif Andersen
Hardware Verification via Boolean Logic Programming,
  Enrico Tronci

Concurrency II
--------------

Compositionality via Cut-Elimination:
Hennessy-Milner Logic for an Arbitrary GSOS,
  Alex K. Simpson
Compositional Testing Preorders for Probabilistic Processes,
  Bengt Jonsson, Wang Yi

Semantics II
------------

The Stone Gamut: A Coordinatization of Mathematics,
  Vaughan R. Pratt
Logically Presented Domains,
  Erik Palmgren, Viggo Stoltenberg-Hansen
Domain Theory in Stochastic Processes,
  Abbas Edalat

Linear Logic
------------

Decision Problems for Second Order Linear Logic,
  Patrick Lincoln, Andre Scedrov, Natarajan Shankar
The Complexity of Neutrals in Linear Logic,
  Max I. Kanovich
Decidability of Linear Affine Logic,
  Alexei P. Kopylov



Date: Sat, 18 Feb 1995 21:23:48 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Faculty positions of potential interest to <<categories>> readers 

Date: Sat, 18 Feb 1995 17:10:20 -0800
From: David B. Benson <dbenson@eecs.wsu.edu>

Faculty Positions in Computer Science
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Washington State University

The School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science solicits
applications for a permanent computer science faculty position at
the Assistant Professor level.  Responsibilities include initiation
and supervision of research programs and instruction at undergraduate
and graduate levels. Applicants should have an earned PhD degree in
Computer Science or in a closely related field by Fall 1995.
We seek outstanding and accomplished candidates in specific
areas of computer science which include computer systems, software
engineering, database systems, networks and distributed systems.
Screening of applications will begin on March 15 and
continue until the position is filled.  Position starts on August 15, 1995.

The School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science solicits
applications for a permanent computer science faculty position at
Associate or Full Professor level.  Responsibilities include initiation
and supervision of research programs and instruction at undergraduate
and graduate levels. Applicants should have an earned PhD degree with proven
records of accomplishment
in their fields as evidenced by sponsored research programs and
publications.  We seek outstanding and accomplished candidates in specific
areas of computer science which include software engineering, specification
and verification, operating systems, database systems, and other related
software areas.  Screening of applications will begin on December 15 and
continue until the position is filled.  Position start on August 15, 1995.

-----------------
Washington State University has offered the Ph.D. in computer science
since 1970, and also offers B.S. and M.S. degrees.  The School of EECS
has over forty faculty (approximately fifteen with primary interests in
computer science and engineering), sixty computer science graduate
students, and active research groups devoted to parallel and distributed
processing, imaging (computer graphics, visualization, image processing,
and vision), artificial intelligence, neural networks, and other areas.
Computing facilities in the School of EECS include PCs, graphics workstations,
and servers, all with Internet access.

WSU has about 17,000 students and is located in Pullman, a quiet
university town in the southeast corner of the state (approximately 75
miles south of Spokane).  Nearby are some of the nation's most pristine
and uncrowded places for outdoor recreation.  The Pullman school system is
widely acknowledged to be one of the very finest in the Pacific Northwest.

 ! Applicants should send a cover letter, a curriculum vita, and the names and
 ! addresses of three references qualified to comment on their research and
 ! teaching qualifications to
 ! 
 ! Chair, Computer Science Search Committee
 ! School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
 ! Washington State University
 ! Pullman, WA 99164-2752

WSU is an EO/AA educator and employer.  Protected group members are
encouraged to apply.


Date: Wed, 22 Feb 1995 03:55:04 -0400 (AST)
Subject: course on categories available 

Date: Tue, 21 Feb 1995 15:46:42 +0100
From: Jaap van Oosten <jvoosten@daimi.aau.dk>


I wrote a first course in category theory which I think more
or less contains what's presumed knowledge in not too specialized
papers and thesises (in computer science). It's 75 pages.
The synopsis is:

1. Categories and functors. Definitions and examples. Duality principle.
2. Natural transformations. Exponents in Cat. Yoneda lemma. Equivalence
   of categories; Set^{op} equivalent to Complete Atomic Boolean Algebras.
3. Limits and Colimits. Functors preserving (reflecting) them. (Finitely)
   complete categories. Limits by products and equalizers.
4. A little piece of categorical logic. Regular categories, regular epi-mono
   factorization, subobjects. Interpretation of coherent logic in regular
   categories. Expressing categorical facts in the logic. Example of
   \Omega -valued sets for a frame \Omega.
5. Adjunctions. Examples. (Co)limits as adjoints. Adjoints preserve (co)limits.
   Adjoint functor theorem.
6. Monads and Algebras. Examples. Eilenberg Moore and Kleisli as terminal
   and initial adjunctions inducing a monad. Groups monadic over Set.
   Lift and Powerset monads and their algebras. Forgetful functor from
   T-Alg creates limits.
7. Cartesian closed categories and the \lambda-calculus. Examples of ccc's.
   Parameter theorem. Typed \lambda calculus and its interpretation in
   ccc's. Ccc's with natural numbers object: all primitive recursive functions
   are representable

The notes are available by anonymous ftp via:
ftp ftp.daimi.aau.dk
cd pub/BRICS/LS/95/1
get BRICS-LS-95-1.ps.gz

Jaap van Oosten


Date: Thu, 23 Feb 1995 23:57:19 -0400 (AST)
Subject: FinLim et FinProd ? 

Date: Thu, 23 Feb 95 16:18:35 +0100
From: Monique Mathieu <momathie@mathp7.jussieu.fr>

	Lors des Journees d'Etude sur les Esquisses du 6 et 7 fevrier,
organisees a Paris 7, j'ai ete sollicitee pour parler sur le theme "
esquissabilite et monadicite ". J'ai relu differents textes a cette
occasion et j'ai notamment trouve une construction tres naturelle de
l'esquisse des categories a limites choisies, construction qui demontre de
plus la monadicite de cette categorie sur Cat. Recemment, on m'a montre le
texte de Atish Bagchi et Charles Wells : " Graph-based Logic and Sketches
I : The General Framework ". Je trouve ce texte fort bien ecrit mais
complique, notamment la construction des esquisses de categories a
produits ou limites choisis (FinProd et FinLim), sans comprendre la raison
de cette complication. Quelqu'un peut-il m'expliquer l'interet (cache) de
cette complication ? 

Je peux, bien sur, envoyer a quiconque me le demandera mes references, voire
un resume, en anglais si necessaire, de la construction que j'annonce.
Cordialement.     Monique Mathieu.


Date: Sun, 26 Feb 1995 02:03:41 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Appointment

Date: Fri, 24 Feb 1995 10:37:04 GMT
From: ajp@dcs.ed.ac.uk

Dear Colleagues,
		It gives me great pleasure to announce that Edmund
Robinson has accepted a full professorship in the Computer Science
Department of the Queen Mary and Westfield College of the University
of London. It is one of the best Computer Science departments in
Britain. Peter Landin is there, as is David Pym, and I believe Samson
Abramsky received his doctorate there.
	With best wishes,
		John Power.


Date: Sun, 26 Feb 1995 02:06:28 -0400 (AST)
Subject: Research Fellowships at QMW 

Date: Fri, 24 Feb 1995 13:54:28 +0100 (MET)
From: Edmund Robinson <edmundr@daimi.aau.dk>

Please bring these research fellowships to the notice of anyone you 
think might be interested. 

all best wishes
Edmund Robinson
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary & Westfield College
University of London



ADVANCED / SENIOR  RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS

As an important part  of  our  strategy  to  accelerate  research
activity  in  this  highly-rated  research  department we wish to
appoint a small number of full-time Research Fellows in  Computer
Science.

The fellowships will be of one to  two  years  duration  and  are
aimed   at   experienced   researchers  who  would  benefit  from
collaborating with staff at QMW in a lively  and  well  resourced
research setting.

The  department  (rated  4A  in  the  last  research  selectivity
exercise)  has  strong  well resourced research groups in several
mainstream  areas  of  computer  science  including;   artificial
intelligence;  computer graphics and virtual reality; distributed
and parallel systems;  human  computer  interaction,  programming
and the theory of computation.

Applicants for an Advanced Fellowship (Ref: 95034) should have  a
PhD  in  a  relevant  area  of  computer  science together with a
minimum  of two years research experience and  sound  publication
record  providing  evidence of potential to lead research. Salary
will be in the range 16,075 - 23,087 pounds.

Applicants for a Senior Research  Fellowship  (Ref:  95035)  must
have  a minimum of five years research experience since obtaining
their PhD in a relevant area of computer science together with an
excellent  publication record providing evidence of a significant
contribution to their  chosen area of computer science and proven
ability  to  lead  research. Salary will be  in the range 26511 -
32665 pounds.

For informal discussions contact Mel  Slater  (mel@dcs.qmw.ac.uk)
(0171  975  52..) further information about the department can be
found on World Wide Web: http://www.dcs.qmw.ac.uk/

For an application form and further details, please telephone our
24  hour  Recruitment Line on 0171 975 5171, quoting the relevant
Reference Number. Completed applications forms should be returned
by  14th  March  1995  to  the Recruitment Coordinator, Personnel
Office, Queen Mary and Westfield College, Mile End  Road,  London
E1 4NS.

-------------------------------------------------------------
This announcement is also available on World Wide Web:
  http://www.dcs.qmw.ac.uk/~mel/Admin/fellowad.html









Date: Tue, 28 Feb 1995 00:16:28 -0400 (AST)
Subject: APCS questionnaire form 

Date: Sun, 26 Feb 95 10:47 GMT
From: Dr. P.T. Johnstone <P.T.Johnstone@pmms.cam.ac.uk>

The following is the (slightly amended) text of an e-mail message I
have just sent to Paula Sonneveld at Kluwer Academic Publishers. It
should be self-explanatory. If you agree with me about the
questionnaire form, please send a message to Ms Sonneveld
(paula.sonneveld@wkap.nl) saying so---it is only by concerted action
that we can check the spread of this bureaucratic nonsense.

Peter Johnstone
___________________________________________________________________
Dear Ms Sonneveld,

I have just sent you a report on paper no. (deleted) by (name deleted),
which you asked me to referee for the journal `Applied Categorical
Structures'. Having refereed several papers for this journal, I am
becoming increasingly irritated by the questionnaire form which you send
out with every paper. Several of the questions on this form are
invariably irrelevant to mathematical papers, and those that do have
some relevance are almost always impossible to answer with a straight
`yes' or `no'---the only sensible answer is `read my detailed report'.
So it seems to me that the questionnaire is a complete waste of time and
paper.

I therefore wish to inform you that, although I remain entirely willing
to referee papers for `Applied Categorical Structures', I shall in
future ignore any papers which you send to me accompanied by this
questionnaire. I further intend to publicize this decision via the
`Categories' electronic mailing list, and to urge other
category-theorists who have refereed for APCS and who agree with me
about the uselessness of this form to take the same action.

Yours sincerely, Peter Johnstone


