Path: news.gmane.io!.POSTED.ciao.gmane.io!not-for-mail
From: "Harley D. Eades III" <harley.eades@gmail.com>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Second CFP GraMSec 2020
Date: Wed, 8 Apr 2020 13:48:11 -0400
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1jMc5Y-0002WF-Pg@rr.mta.ca>
Reply-To: "Harley D. Eades III" <harley.eades@gmail.com>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="UTF-8"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable
Injection-Info: ciao.gmane.io; posting-host="ciao.gmane.io:159.69.161.202";
	logging-data="58658"; mail-complaints-to="usenet@ciao.gmane.io"
To: "categories@mta.ca list" <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: majordomo@rr.mta.ca Thu Apr 09 20:40:43 2020
Return-path: <majordomo@rr.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane-mx.org
Original-Received: from smtp2.mta.ca ([198.164.44.55])
	by ciao.gmane.io with esmtps (TLS1.2:ECDHE_RSA_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:256)
	(Exim 4.92)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@rr.mta.ca>)
	id 1jMc6U-000F8T-Qn
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane-mx.org; Thu, 09 Apr 2020 20:40:42 +0200
Original-Received: from rr.mta.ca ([198.164.44.159]:50512)
	by smtp2.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.80)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@rr.mta.ca>)
	id 1jMc5X-0006Ro-WF; Thu, 09 Apr 2020 15:39:44 -0300
Original-Received: from majordomo by rr.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.92.1)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@rr.mta.ca>)
	id 1jMc5Y-0002WF-Pg
	for categories-list@rr.mta.ca; Thu, 09 Apr 2020 15:39:44 -0300
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.io gmane.science.mathematics.categories:10191
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/10191>

Hi, everyone.

A few updates with respect to GraMSec 2020.  It is now going to be fully
online, and we will have a post proceedings in LNCS.

I would like to reiterate what I said before, we have an updated scope:

1. Graph representations: mathematical, conceptual, and implemented
tools for describing and reasoning about security and safety
2. Logical approaches: formal logical tools for representing and
reasoning about graphs and their use as modelling tools in security
7. Semantics: developing or studying semantic approaches to graph-based
models used in security like set theoretic models, categorical models,
logical models, etc.
8. Threat modelling: modelling and analysing software systems security,
models for DevSecOps, etc.
9. Security requirements: models and tools for describing and analysing
requirements on system security and privacy.
11. Secure systems: safe and secure system design, quantification of
security/safety, models for system security/safety evaluation.

These entries have a large non-empty intersection with topics related to
this community.

So submissions from this community will be well-received.

Feel free to contact me with any questions.

Very best,
Harley

=3DCFP Below=3D

GraMSec 2020: The Seventh International Workshop on Graphical Models for
Security
http://gramsec.uni.lu

June 22, 2020 *Online event*
Co-located with CSF 2020

*LNCS post-proceedings confirmed*

SCOPE

The use of graphical security models to represent and analyse the
security of systems has gained an increasing research attention over the
last two decades. Formal methods and computer security researchers, as
well as security professionals from the industry and government, have
proposed various graphical security models, metrics, and measurements.
Graphical models are used to capture different security facets and
address a range of challenges including security assessment, automated
defence, secure services composition, security policy validation, and
verification. The International Workshop on Graphical Models for Security
is an established scientific event dedicated to study and exchange
of experiences on graphical security and safety modelling.


TOPICS

This year, we encourage excellent submissions related, but not
restricted, to the following broad headings:
1. Graph representations: mathematical, conceptual, and implemented
tools for describing and reasoning about security and safety
2. Logical approaches: formal logical tools for representing and
reasoning about graphs and their use as modelling tools in security
3. Machine learning: modelling and reasoning about the role of big data
and machine learning in security operations
4. Networks in national security: terrorist networks, counter-terrorism
networks; safety in national infrastructure (e.g., utilities and
transportation)
5. Risk analysis and management: models and graphical methodologies for
security and privacy risk management in business and organisational
architectures
6. Social networks: using and reasoning about social graphs, network
analysis, network protocols, social mapping, sociometry.
7. Semantics: developing or studying semantic approaches to graph-based
models used in security like set theoretic models, categorical models,
logical models, etc.
8. Threat modelling: modelling and analysing software systems security,
models for DevSecOps, etc.
9. Security requirements: models and tools for describing and analysing
requirements on system security and privacy.
10. Visual security: modelling and analytics for security visualisations.
11. Secure systems: safe and secure system design, quantification of
security/safety, models for system security/safety evaluation.

We welcome a broad range of contributions: from theory to tools and
experience reports. Preference will be given to papers likely to
stimulate high-quality debate at the Workshop.

SUBMISSION GUIDELINES

We solicit two types of submissions:
- Regular papers (up to 18 pages, excluding the bibliography and
well-marked appendices) describing original and unpublished work within
the scope of the workshop.
- Short papers (up to 10 pages, excluding the bibliography and
well-marked appendices) describing original and unpublished work in
progress.

The reviewers are not required to read the appendices, so the papers
should be intelligible without them. All submissions must be prepared
using the LNCS style. Each paper will undergo a thorough review process.
Submissions should be made using the GraMSec 2020 EasyChair website:
https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=3Dgramsec2020.

PUBLICATION

As in previous editions, we the post-proceedings will be published
in the Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) series,
published by Springer. Proceedings will be published after the
workshop, thus permitting the authors to incorporate feedback.

VENUE

Due to the current coronavirus outbreak, the IEEE CSF Symposium
and its associated workshops, including GraMSec, will be held
online this year. Details about registration and participation will
be soon made available.

IMPORTANT DATES

Given the situation and the fact that the workshop will be held online,
we will keep only one submission deadline.

- Paper submissions due: Friday, April 24, 2020
- Notifications: Friday, May 29, 2020

- Workshop: Monday, June 22, 2020
- Camera ready versions due: Friday, August 7, 2020

PROGRAM CHAIRS

Harley Eades III, Augusta University, United States of America
Olga Gadyatskaya, Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science,
Leiden University, The Netherlands

STEERING COMMITTEE

Sushil Jajodia, George Mason University, United States of America
Barbara Fila, INSA Rennes and IRISA, France
Sjouke Mauw, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Christian W. Probst, Unitec, New Zealand
Ketil St=C3=B8len, SINTEF Digital and University of Oslo, Norway

PUBLICITY CHAIR

Barbara Fila, INSA Rennes and IRISA, France

WEB CHAIR

Reynaldo Gil Pons, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

