Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: POWELL Olivier <Olivier.Powell@cui.unige.ch>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: ICALP'00:call for papers
Date: Wed, 03 Nov 1999 15:57:47 +0100
Lines: 197
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <38204D6A.915697D8@cui.unige.ch>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=iso-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241017684 30288 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:08:04 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:08:04 +0000 (UTC)
To: "Rolim Jose D. P." <Jose.Rolim@cui.unige.ch>
Original-X-From: cat-dist Wed Nov  3 13:56:01 1999
Original-Received: (from Majordom@localhost)
	by mailserv.mta.ca (8.9.3/8.9.3) id LAA21803
	for categories-list; Wed, 3 Nov 1999 11:36:19 -0400 (AST)
X-Authentication-Warning: mailserv.mta.ca: Majordom set sender to cat-dist@mta.ca using -f
X-Mailer: Mozilla 4.5 [en] (X11; I; SunOS 5.6 sun4u)
X-Accept-Language: en
X-MIME-Autoconverted: from QUOTED-PRINTABLE to 8bit by mailserv.mta.ca id KAA13284
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 5
Status: O
Content-Length: 5808
Original-Lines: 196
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:1262
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/1262>



                         Call for Papers

                            ICALP'00
        27-th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages
                        and Programming

              July 9-15, 2000,  Geneva, Switzerland

The 27-th annual meeting of the European Association of Theoretical
Computer
Science will be held in Geneva, Switzerland.

As is the case of the two tracks of the journal Theoretical Computer
Science, the scientific program of the Colloquium is split into two
parts:
Track A of the meeting will correspond to  Algorithms, Automata,
Complexity,
and Games, while Track B to  Logic, Semantics, and Theory of
Programming.


Original contributions to theory of computer science, to be
presented either in Track A or in Track B, are being sought. Authors are

invited to submit extended abstracts of their papers, not
exceeding 12 pages in the standard Springer Verlag LNCS style.
Instructions
for paper submissions can be found  at the conference webpage. Authors
from
countries where access to Internet is difficult may mail a single copy
of
their paper directly to the address of the conference chairman.
Submissions should consist of: a cover page, with the author's full
name, address, fax number, e-mail address, a 100-word abstract, keywords

and to which track (A or B) the paper is being submitted
and an extended abstract describing original research in
no more than 12 pages.
It is expected that accepted papers will be presented at the conference.

Simultaneous submission to other conferences with published proceedings
is not allowed.

In addition, one page proposals for workshops, to be sent to the
conference chair
until November 10, 1999, are welcomed.





                       Conference Chair:
Jose D. P. Rolim
Centre Universitaire d'Informatique
University of Geneva
24 rue du General Dufour
1211 Geneva 4
Switzerland

e-mail:  icalp@cui.unige.ch



                        ICALP'00 Program Committee
Track A:

Emo Welzl, Chair, ETH Zuerich
Harry Buhrman, CWI Amsterdam
Peter Bro Miltersen, Univ. Aarhus
Martin Dietzfelbinger, Techn Univ Ilmenau
Afonso Ferreira, CNRS-I3S-INRIA Sophia Antipolis
Marcos Kiwi, Univ. de Chile
Jens Lagergren, KTH Stockholm
Gheorghe Paun, Romanian Acad.
Guenter Rote, Techn. Univ. Graz
Ronitt Rubinfeld, Cornell Univ.
Amin Shokrollahi, Bell Labs
Luca Trevisan, Columbia Univ.
Serge Vaudenay, ENS Paris
Uri Zwick, Tel Aviv Univ.



Track B:

Ugo Montanari, Chair, Univ. of Pisa
Rajeev Alur, Univ. Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
Rance Cleaveland, SUNY at Stony Brook
Pierpaolo Degano, Univ. of Pisa
Jose Fiadeiro, Univ. of Lisbon
Andy Gordon, Microsoft Research, Cambridge,
Orna Grumberg, Technion, Haifa
Claude Kirchner, Inria, Nancy
Mogens Nielsen, Univ. of Aarhus
Catuscia Palamidessi, Penn. State Univ, Univ. Park
Joachim Parrow, KTH, Stockholm
Edmund Robinson, QMW, London
Jan Rutten, CWI, Amsterdam
Jan Vitek, Univ. of Geneva
Martin Wirsing, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich
Pierre Wolper, Univ. of Liege.



                          Invited Speakers

Track A:

Andrei Broder, Altavista and Compaq
Oded Goldreich, MIT and Weizman Inst.
Johan Håstad, KTH Stockholm
Kurt Mehlhorn, Max Plank Institute


Track B:

Samsom Abramsky, Edinburgh U.
Gregor Engels, Paderborn U.
Roberto Gorrieri, U. Bologna
Zohar Manna, Stanford U.



                          General Information

Geneva is situated along the banks of Lac Leman and Le Rhone.
The lake showcases the plumed fountain Jet d'Eau, and various districts
of Geneva are connected by bridges across the waterways.
The University of Geneva where ICALP '00 will convene is located on the
`Left Bank' off Place Neuve and along the Promenade des Bastions
near the Old Town section of Geneva.

Geneva is a city of water parks and gardens and welcoming walkways
which encourage exploration of the historical sites, museums, and
international business and shopping districts. The University of
Geneva is located near `Old Town' an area dotted with sidewalk
cafes, student life, and building antiquities dating back to the 5th
century.

Geneva is a crossroads situated in the heart of Europe and linked to
the world by a vast network of motorways, airlines and railways. For
those planning to attend ICALP '00 in Geneva, it is an excellent
opportunity to organize short trips into the countryside of charming
villages and vineyards. Tours to please all ages and interests are
available including afternoon train excursions, shopping cruises on
Lake Geneva and The Rhone, and bus and cablecar trips in the Alps.
For some, the most inviting attraction will be mouintain climbing.
Mont Blanc, one of the highest points in Europe and the city of Chamonix

are less than an hour away.


Accomodations at a very special ICALP rate have been reserved in a
couple of hotels and very inexpensive rooms will be available at
the Student Housing.  Lunch will be served daily on campus
and there will be morning and afternoon refreshment breaks.
Note that the specially  priced hotel accommodations reserved
for ICALP participants are located only a 5-10 minute walk to
the campus.




                             Important Dates

Workshop Proposals:   November 10,1999

Submissions:   January 17, 2000

Notification:    March 21, 2000

Final Copies:   April 18, 2000



                             Further Information


Further information related to ICALP'00, with instructions   for paper
submissions and conference registration, as well as with details on
conference site, registration fee, accommodation, social program, and
payments, will appear at the conference webpage at

                       http://cuiwww.unige.ch/~icalp

and in forthcoming issues of EATCS Bulletin. The conference is organized
by
the Centre Universitaire d'Informatique of the University of Geneva.







