Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: POWELL Olivier <Olivier.Powell@cui.unige.ch>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Reminder: ICALP call for paper
Date: Fri, 07 Jan 2000 15:57:24 +0100
Organization: =?iso-8859-1?Q?Universit=E9?= de =?iso-8859-1?Q?Gen=E8ve?=,
	=?iso-8859-1?Q?d=E9partement?= informatique
Lines: 227
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <3875FED4.D70CC46D@cui.unige.ch>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: MULTIPART/MIXED; BOUNDARY="Boundary_(ID_Z0nUk4ToRFq4wHuJZ8SyGw)"
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241017753 30744 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:09:13 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:09:13 +0000 (UTC)
To: Powell Olivier <powell@cui.unige.ch>
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Fri Jan  7 16:23:52 2000 -0400
Original-Received: (from Majordom@localhost)
	by mailserv.mta.ca (8.9.3/8.9.3) id OAA01982
	for categories-list; Fri, 7 Jan 2000 14:03:31 -0400 (AST)
X-Authentication-Warning: mailserv.mta.ca: Majordom set sender to cat-dist@mta.ca using -f
X-Mailer: Mozilla 4.7 [en] (X11; I; SunOS 5.6 sun4u)
X-Accept-Language: en
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Status: RO
Content-Length: 6736
Original-Lines: 226
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:1328
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/1328>

This is a multi-part message in MIME format.

--Boundary_(ID_Z0nUk4ToRFq4wHuJZ8SyGw)
Content-type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-transfer-encoding: 7bit



--Boundary_(ID_Z0nUk4ToRFq4wHuJZ8SyGw)
Content-type: text/plain; name=cfp; charset=us-ascii
Content-disposition: inline; filename=cfp
Content-transfer-encoding: 7bit


                         Call for Papers

                            ICALP'2000
        27-th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages
                        and Programming

              July 9-15, 2000,  Geneva, Switzerland

The 27-th annual meeting of the European Association of Theoretical
Computer Science will be held in Geneva, Switzerland.

As is the case of the two tracks of the journal Theoretical Computer
Science, the scientific program of the Colloquium is split into two
parts: Track A of the meeting will correspond to  Algorithms, Automata,
Complexity, and Games, while Track B will correspond to Logic,
Semantics and Theory of Programming.


Original contributions to theory of computer science, to be
presented either in Track A or in Track B, are being sought.
Authors are invited to submit extended abstracts of their papers, not
exceeding 12 pages in the standard Springer Verlag LNCS style.
Instructions for paper submissions can be found  at the conference
web page.
Authors from countries where access to Internet is difficult may mail 
a single copy of their paper directly to the address of
the conference chairman.
Submissions should consist of: a cover page, with the author's full
name, address, fax number, e-mail address, a 100-word abstract,
keywords, and to which track (A or B) the paper is being submitted
and an extended abstract describing original research in
no more than 12 pages.
It is expected that accepted papers will be presented at the conference.

Simultaneous submission to other conferences with published proceedings
is not allowed.

    
                        


                       Conference Chair:
Jose D. P. Rolim
Centre Universitaire d'Informatique
University of Geneva
24 rue du General Dufour
1211 Geneva 4
Switzerland

mailto:icalp@cui.unige.ch



                        ICALP'2000 Program Committee
Track A:

Emo Welzl, Chair, ETH Zuerich
Harry Buhrman, CWI Amsterdam
Peter Bro Miltersen, Univ. Aarhus
Martin Dietzfelbinger, Techn Univ Ilmenau
Afonso Ferreira, CNRS-I3S-INRIA Sophia Antipolis
Marcos Kiwi, Univ. de Chile
Jens Lagergren, KTH Stockholm
Gheorghe Paun, Romanian Acad.
Guenter Rote, Techn. Univ. Graz
Ronitt Rubinfeld, Cornell Univ.
Amin Shokrollahi, Bell Labs
Luca Trevisan, Columbia Univ.
Serge Vaudenay, ENS Paris
Uri Zwick, Tel Aviv Univ.



Track B:

Ugo Montanari, Chair, Univ. of Pisa
Rajeev Alur, Univ. Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
Rance Cleaveland, SUNY at Stony Brook
Pierpaolo Degano, Univ. of Pisa
Jose Fiadeiro, Univ. of Lisbon
Andy Gordon, Microsoft Research, Cambridge,
Orna Grumberg, Technion, Haifa
Claude Kirchner, Inria, Nancy
Mogens Nielsen, Univ. of Aarhus
Catuscia Palamidessi, Penn. State Univ, Univ. Park
Joachim Parrow, KTH, Stockholm
Edmund Robinson, QMW, London
Jan Rutten, CWI, Amsterdam
Jan Vitek, Univ. of Geneva
Martin Wirsing, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich
Pierre Wolper, Univ. of Liege.



                          Special Award


Richard Karp, Berkeley


                          Invited Speakers

Track A:

Andrei Broder, Altavista
Oded Goldreich, MIT and Weizman Inst.
Johan Haastad, KTH Stockholm
Kurt Mehlhorn, Max Plank Institute


Track B:

Samsom Abramsky, Edinburgh U.
Gregor Engels, Paderborn U.
Roberto Gorrieri, U. Bologna
Zohar Manna, Stanford U.


                         Satellite Workshops



* Workshop on Randomization and Approximation in CS. (RANDOM'2000)

* Workshop on Algorithms for Communication Networks (ARACNE)                                    

* Workshop on Boolean Functions and Applications

* Workshop on Intersection Types and Related Systems (ITRS '00)

* Workshop on Graph Transformation and Visual Modeling Techniques

* Workshop on Process Algebra and Performance Models (PAPM 2000)

* Workshop on Theor. Found. of Security Analysis and Design (IFIP WG 1.7)
                                     







                          General Information

Geneva is situated along the banks of Lac Leman and Le Rhone.
The lake showcases the plumed fountain Jet d'Eau, and various districts
of Geneva are connected by bridges across the waterways.
The University of Geneva where ICALP '00 will convene is located on the
`Left Bank' off Place Neuve and along the Promenade des Bastions
near the Old Town section of Geneva.

Geneva is a city of water parks and gardens and welcoming walkways
which encourage exploration of the historical sites, museums, and
international business and shopping districts. The University of
Geneva is located near `Old Town' an area dotted with sidewalk
cafes, student life, and building antiquities dating back to the 5th
century.

Geneva is a crossroads situated in the heart of Europe and linked to
the world by a vast network of motorways, airlines and railways. For
those planning to attend ICALP '00 in Geneva, it is an excellent
opportunity to organize short trips into the countryside of charming
villages and vineyards. Tours to please all ages and interests are
available including afternoon train excursions, shopping cruises on
Lake Geneva and The Rhone, and bus and cablecar trips in the Alps.
For some, the most inviting attraction will be mouintain climbing.
Mont Blanc, one of the highest points in Europe and the city of Chamonix
are less than an hour away.


Accomodations at a very special ICALP rate have been reserved in a
couple of hotels and very inexpensive rooms will be available at
the Student Housing.  Lunch will be served daily on campus
and there will be morning and afternoon refreshment breaks.
Note that the specially  priced hotel accommodations reserved
for ICALP participants are located only a 5-10 minute walk to
the campus.




                             Important Dates

Workshop Proposals:   November 10,1999

Submissions:   January 17, 2000

Notification:    March 21, 2000

Final Copies:   April 18, 2000



                             Further Information


Further information related to ICALP'00, with instructions   for paper
submissions and conference registration, as well as with details on
conference site, registration fee, accommodation, social program, and
payments, will appear at the conference webpage at

                       http://cuiwww.unige.ch/~icalp

and in forthcoming issues of EATCS Bulletin. The conference is organized
by the Centre Universitaire d'Informatique of the University of Geneva.




--Boundary_(ID_Z0nUk4ToRFq4wHuJZ8SyGw)--


