Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: csl03 <csl03@logic.at>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: [Csl03] Call for Participation
Date: Fri, 4 Jul 2003 13:09:06 +0200 (CEST)
Lines: 192
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <Pine.LNX.4.53.0307041303150.6530__11882.4278274134$1241018613$gmane$org@gamma.logic.tuwien.ac.at>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=iso-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: QUOTED-PRINTABLE
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241018612 3823 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:23:32 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:23:32 +0000 (UTC)
To: csl03-calls@logic.at
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Fri Jul  4 14:24:11 2003 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Fri, 04 Jul 2003 14:24:11 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.10)
	id 19YSoR-00004D-00
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Fri, 04 Jul 2003 12:49:27 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 2
Status: RO
Content-Length: 7181
Original-Lines: 191
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:2374
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/2374>

We apologize for multiple copies of this call for participation


            Annual Conference of the European Association for
                        Computer Science Logic
                                and
                    8th Kurt Goedel Colloquium

                           CSL'03 & KGC


         25 August afternoon - 30 August 2003, Vienna, Austria

                       http://www.logic.at/csl03


Computer Science Logic (CSL)  is  the annual conference  of  the European
Association  for  Computer  Science  Logic  (EACSL).    The  Kurt  Goedel
Colloquium  (KGC)   is   the  biennial  conference  of  the  Kurt  Goedel
Society (KGS).   The joint conference is intended for computer scientists
whose  research  activities  involve  logic,  as  well  as  for logicians
working on issues significant for computer science.


 LIST OF ACCEPTED PAPERS

 A Fixed-Point Logic with Symmetric Choice
   (Anuj Dawar and David Richerby)
 A Logic for Probability in Quantum Systems
   (Ron van der Meyden, Manas Patra)
 A Strongly Normalising Curry-Howard correspondence for IZF Set Theory
   (Alexandre Miquel)
 Atomic Cut Elimination for Classical Logic
   (Kai Br=FCnnler)
 Automata on Lempel-Ziv-compressed strings
   (Hans Leiss, Michel de Rougemont)
 Bistability: an extensional characterization of sequentiality.
   (James Laird)
 Calculi of Meta-variables
   (Masahiko Sato, Takafumi Sakurai, Yukiyoshi Kameyama, Atsushi Igarashi)
 Comparing the succinctness of monadic query languages over finite trees
   (Martin Grohe, Nicole Schweikardt)
 Complexity of Some Problems in Modal and Intuitionistic Calculi
   (Larisa Maksimova and Andrei Voronkov)
 Computational Aspects of $\Sigma$-definability over the Real Numbers
   without the Equality Test
   (Margarita Korovina)
 Concurrent Construction of Proof-Nets
   (Jean-Marc Andreoli, Laurent Mazar=E9)
 Constraint Satisfaction with Countable Homogeneous Templates
   (Manuel Bodirsky and Jaroslav Nesetril)
 Coping polynomially with numerous but identical elements within planning
   problems.
   (Max Kanovich and Jacqueline Vauzeilles)
 Deciding Monotonic Games
   (Parosh Aziz Abdulla, Ahmed Bouajjani, Julien d'Orso)
 Extending the Dolev-Yao Intruder for Analyzing an Unbounded Number of
   Sessions
   (Yannick Chevalier, Ralf Kusters, Michael Rusinowitch,
    Mathieu Turuani, Laurent Vigneron)
 Generating all Abductive Explanations for Queries on Propositional Horn
   Theories
   (Thomas Eiter, Kazuhisa Makino)
 Goal-Directed Calculi for Goedel-Dummett Logics
   (George Metcalfe, Nicola Olivetti and Dov Gabbay)
 Henkin models of the partial lambda-calculus
   (Lutz Schr=F6der)
 Logical relation for dynamic name creation
   (Yu ZHANG, David NOWAK)
 Machine Characterizations of the Classes of the W-hierarchy.
   (Yijia Chen and Joerg Flum)
 Modular Semantics and Logics of Classes
   (Bernhard Reus)
 More computation power for a denotational semantics for first order logic
   (C.F.M. Vermeulen)
 Nominal Unification
   (Christian Urban, Andrew Pitts, Murdoch Gabbay)
 On Algebraic Specifications of Abstract Data Types
   (Bakhadyr Khoussainov)
 On Complexity gaps for Resolution-based proof systems
   (Stefan Dantchev and S=F8ren Riis)
 On the Complexity of Existential Pebble Games
   (Phokion G. Kolaitis and Jonathan Panttaja)
 Parity of Imperfection
   (J. C. Bradfield)
 Pebble games on trees
   (Lukasz Krzeszczakowski)
 Positive Games and Persistent Strategies
   (Jacques Duparc)
 Program Complexity of Dynamic LTL Model Checking
   (Detlef K=E4hler, Thomas Wilke)
 Quantified Constraints: Algorithms and Complexity
   (Ferdinand Boerner, Andrei Bulatov, Peter Jeavons, Andrei Krokhin)
 Refined Complexity Analysis of Cut Elimination
   (Philipp Gerhardy)
 Simple stochastic parity games
   (Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Marcin Jurdzinski)
 Strong normalization of the typed $\lambda_{ws}$- calculus
   (Ren=E9 DAVID & Bruno Guillaume)
 The Arithmetical Complexity of Dimension and Randomness
   (John M. Hitchcock, Jack H. Lutz, Sebastiaan A. Terwijn)
 The Commuting V-Diagram: On the Relation of Refinement and Testing
   (Bernhard K. Aichernig)
 The Surprising Power of Restricted Programs and G=F6del's Functionals
   (Lars Kristiansen, Paul J. Voda)
 Towards a proof system for admissibility
   (R. Iemhoff)
 Validity of CTL Queries Revisited
   (Marko Samer, Helmut Veith)

Registration is through the Internet:
                 http://www.logic.at/csl03/
The registration fee (400 euro) includes the costs for the conference
dinner, the reception, and a copy of the conference proceedings. The
registration fee does not include the costs for the excursion to Wachau.

INVITED SPEAKERS:

  Sergei Artemov (CUNY, USA) [jointly invited by  CSL'03 & KGC and
       ESSLLI (European Summer School in Logic Language and Information)]

  Bruno Buchberger (Johannes Kepler University, Austria)
  Dov Gabbay (King's College London, England)
  Helmut Veith (Vienna University of Technology, Austria)
  Nikolai Vorobjov (University of Bath, England)
  Andrei Voronkov (University of Manchester, England)

TUTORIALS:

  Verification of infinite state systems
    (Ahmed Bouajjani, University of Paris 7, France)
  Computational epsilon calculus
    (Georg Moser, University of Muenster, Germany, and
     Richard Zach, University of Calgary, Canada)
  Quantifier elimination
    (Nikolai Vorobjov, University of Bath, England)
  Winning strategies and controller synthesis
    (Igor Walukiewicz, University of Bordeaux, France)


INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM COMMITTEE

 Matthias Baaz (chair), Vienna University of Technology
 Arnold Beckmann, Vienna University of Technology
 Lev Beklemishev, Steklov Inst., Moscow / Utrecht Univ.
 Agata Ciabattoni, Vienna University of Technology
 Kousha Etessami, University of Edinburgh, Informatics
 Chris Fermueller, Vienna University of Technology
 Didier Galmiche, LORIA - UHP Nancy
 Harald Ganzinger, Max Plank Institut (Saarbr=FCcken)
 Erich Gr=E4del, Aachen University
 Petr Hajek, Institute for Computer Science, Chech Academy of Science (Prag=
ue)
 Martin Hyland, DPMMS , University of Cambridge
 Reinhard Kahle, DI, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
 Helene Kirchner, LORIA CNRS
 Daniel Leivant, Indiana University Bloomington
 Johann Makowsky (co-chair), Technion-IIT, Haifa
 Jerzy Marcinkowski, Wroclaw University
 Franco Montagna, Department of Mathematics, Siena
 Robert Nieuwenhuis, Tech. Univ. Catalonia (Barcelona)
 Michel Parigot, CNRS / Universit=E9 Paris 7
 Jeff Paris, Manchester University, Mathematics Dept
 Helmut Schwichtenberg, Munich University, Dept. of Mathematics
 Jerzy Tiuryn, Warsaw University

 LOCAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE

 Matthias Baaz, Chair
 Arnold Beckmann
 Agata Ciabattoni
 Christian Ferm=FCller
 Rosalie Iemhoff
 Norbert Preining
 Sebastiaan Terwijn

 COLOCATED EVENTS

 CoLogNET (23 August)
   Workshop on Logic-based Methods for Information Integration
   See http://www.kr.tuwien.ac.at/colognet_ws/

 GAMES   (30 August - 2 September)
   2nd Annual Workshop of the European Research Training Network
   GAMES (Games and Automata  for Synthesis and Validation).
   See http://www.games.rwth-aachen.de.






