Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Louis Nel in the news
Date: Sun, 27 Jul 2003 11:41:37 -0400 (EDT)
Lines: 219
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <200307271541.h6RFfbUD007308@saul.cis.upenn.edu>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241018636 3974 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:23:56 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:23:56 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Sun Jul 27 14:58:35 2003 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Sun, 27 Jul 2003 14:58:35 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.10)
	id 19gpg5-0005kB-00
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 27 Jul 2003 14:51:25 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 31
Status: O
Content-Length: 11219
Original-Lines: 218
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:2403
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/2403>

  On a recent warm summer's Monday evening, I met Louis Nel, club
  founder and current president for a game and plenty of instruction.

                                * * *

  "It's a game with a magical touch," says Nel, a retired Professor of
  Mathematics at Carleton University with a PhD from Cambridge. "When
  I first saw the game, I was enchanted. My reaction was very similar
  to when I fell in love. There's a real kinship between croquet
  players who feel this. And it is definitely a different experience
  than meeting another toothbrush user."

  When he started playing croquet, Nel "knew nothing about the game at
  all. For me it was just an image out of Alice in Wonderland." But
  when the soft-spoken South African -- who is now a Team Canada
  player and ranked 18th in North America -- bought a toy croquet set
  for his four children from Canadian Tire, he was hooked. "The
  children moved on and thought of it as nothing more than a good
  game, but I saw that there was a lot more to croquet than a toy set.
  So I went to nearly every sports store in Ottawa and no one knew
  anything about the game."

  Nel pursued his passion for a real croquet set and once he'd found
  one he drove all the way to Toronto just to look at it. He didn't
  even buy it. But when he did finally buy a set, it had a copy of a
  croquet magazine in it and that was the lead he needed that set him
  on the path to founding Croquet Ottawa.

  For a year, Nel drove to Montreal once or twice a week to play at a
  Westmount club, but he realized that it was no long-term solution.
  He needed a club nearby and he realized that they only way to get it
  was to create it himself.

                                * * *

  Nel tells the story of a bunch of lawyers who came to play at the
  club for an office outing. As one young man lined up with a glint in
  his eye, he hit his opponent's ball to the far side of the court.
  "So sorry, Boss," he said with a huge grin. This captures the
  essence of the game. Croquet can be highly competitive and really
  quite nasty, but at the same time it's lots of fun.


                  Copyright 2003 CanWest Interactive
                            Ottawa Citizen

                 July 26, 2003 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: The Citizen's Weekly: Style; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 1391 words

HEADLINE: Serenity on the green: Croquet is all grown up and making
its presence felt in Ottawa

SOURCE: The Ottawa Citizen

BYLINE: Hattie Klotz

BODY: At the noisy corner of Bronson Avenue and Gladstone Street,
where trucks thunder by and a film of city grime and street dirt
covers almost everything, there's an oasis of calm. Sparkling like an
emerald in the dust, the smooth, green lawns of the Central Lawn
Bowling club form a square, bounded by chain-link fences, at this busy
intersection. It's here that Croquet Ottawa makes it home.

Croquet, you say? Yes, that childhood game that entails hitting a ball
through a hoop, once played on lawns and at cottages across the
country, has some serious players right here in Ottawa. While the
rules of the game vary according to geography (there's a North
American version, an international version, a version that is most
popular in Egypt, a cottage version), three times a week, the members
of Croquet Ottawa gather at the club on Gladstone or at Elmdale Lawn
Bowling club where they also have playing privileges, to enjoy a game
or two.

Croquet is the perfect way to pass a couple of hours. On a recent warm
summer's Monday evening, I met Louis Nel, club founder and current
president for a game and plenty of instruction. As soon as club
members measured out the correct distances on the court -- croquet is
nothing if not a game of precision -- and hammered in the hoops, two
games got underway side-by-side.

We played Golf Croquet, a version of the game that was new to me, but
proved simple and easy to grasp. There were plenty of exciting moments
during our fast and fluid game. And I found that as I concentrated on
each of my plays and their consequences several turns down the line,
everything but the game faded into the background. I didn't notice the
noise from the street. I couldn't imagine that I was in the middle of
the city. It was enough to be simply playing croquet.

The sound of mallet on ball and the satisfying thud when struck
cleanly and correctly, absorbed my attention. I realized croquet is
more than a game for children and elderly aunts. It is a game of
strategy. It is a mental game, somewhat like a cross between snooker
and croquet. It's a game for the soul too, as there's a serene,
timeless quality about playing as the sun sets and the lights come on
around this small square of green in the middle of so much concrete.
There's a certain contemplative side to croquet, since it's not
athletically demanding. And it's always played in beautiful
surroundings on velvet-smooth lawns.

"It's a game with a magical touch," says Nel, a retired Professor of
Mathematics at Carleton University with a PhD from Cambridge. "When I
first saw the game, I was enchanted. My reaction was very similar to
when I fell in love. There's a real kinship between croquet players
who feel this. And it is definitely a different experience than
meeting another toothbrush user."

When he started playing croquet, Nel "knew nothing about the game at
all. For me it was just an image out of Alice in Wonderland." But when
the soft-spoken South African -- who is now a Team Canada player and
ranked 18th in North America -- bought a toy croquet set for his four
children from Canadian Tire, he was hooked. "The children moved on and
thought of it as nothing more than a good game, but I saw that there
was a lot more to croquet than a toy set. So I went to nearly every
sports store in Ottawa and no one knew anything about the game."

Nel pursued his passion for a real croquet set and once he'd found one
he drove all the way to Toronto just to look at it. He didn't even buy
it. But when he did finally buy a set, it had a copy of a croquet
magazine in it and that was the lead he needed that set him on the
path to founding Croquet Ottawa.

For a year, Nel drove to Montreal once or twice a week to play at a
Westmount club, but he realized that it was no long-term solution. He
needed a club nearby and he realized that they only way to get it was
to create it himself.

Croquet Ottawa was formed in 1994 with founding members Ken Shipley, a
co-team Canada member who stills plays at the club -- his Team Canada
sign remains above the door in the clubhouse -- and Robert Armstrong,
who has now moved to Northern California, "but who gave me the nudge
of encouragement and was a constant spiritual presence and
enthusiasm," says Nel. "When you're starting something like this, you
need some luck and for me, Ken has been a real shot in the arm.
Another is Dean Chamberlain, a very gregarious man who has recruited
many players." Chamberlain is vice-president of the club and Shipley
began playing 10 years ago when he played at a garden party and, "had
bad knees from tennis so was looking for something else to do," he
says.

Croquet Ottawa now counts approximately 10 regular players among its
members. They make up a snapshot of Canadian demographics. There are a
couple of Canadians, a South African, an Englishman, a Ukrainian and
an Italian.

The evening I played, our foursome consisted of me, a Brit, Stuart, a
Canadian, Louis, South African and Marco, an Italian. Only in Canada
could this happen. They don't play croquet in Italy. "I was looking
for a summer sport," explained Marco, "as I snowboard in the winter
and I just didn't know what to do. A friend suggested I try this and
..." Well, four years later, Marco plays at a competitive level, with
a glint in his eye and a killer instinct. But in spite of the
opportunity for really vindictive and venomous play that croquet
presents -- it's all too tempting to hit another player's ball for six
-- "everybody is very relaxed and at peace in the club," says Nel,
"and we've never had a moment of strife."

Nel tells the story of a bunch of lawyers who came to play at the club
for an office outing. As one young man lined up with a glint in his
eye, he hit his opponent's ball to the far side of the court. "So
sorry, Boss," he said with a huge grin. This captures the essence of
the game. Croquet can be highly competitive and really quite nasty,
but at the same time it's lots of fun.

Before the birth of Croquet Ottawa, there were other traces of the
game in the city, "principally on the lawns of private homes in
Rockcliffe," says Nel. But there's also a croquet court in Rockcliffe
Park. Directly opposite Ashbury School, the lawn is a hidden gem.
Enclosed by eight-foot tall cedar hedges, it has a newly refurbished
clubhouse, flowerbeds overflowing with day lilies, picnic tables and
benches under fruit trees and scattered pieces of stone sculpture.

"It used to be a lawn bowling club," says Brian Murray, "that saw it's
heyday in the 1950s and '60s. It was a very busy part of Rockcliffe
social life. But it became primarily a croquet club in the 1980s," due
to the enthusiasm of Patrick Murray, former Mayor of Rockcliffe Park.
"He had the lawn specially seeded and mowed. We measured it out to
international standards and brought in experts from Saratoga, New York
and West Palm Beach in Florida. We played tournaments with these clubs
and we used to have a diplomatic tournament. There's even a huge
trophy. It's a giant croquet mallet, about 10 feet tall."

But with the amalgamation of Rockcliffe with the City of Ottawa two
years ago, the club died. "The minute Rockcliffe lost its autonomy,
the city really didn't have the funds to put into the upkeep of the
lawn," says Murray. Now, during the winter the land is turned into a
skating rink for children, which means that the grass is destroyed
come spring.

Croquet is a game that is dear to many people's hearts. It's easy to
grasp and can be played at many levels. It's a welcoming game and so
are the members of Croquet Ottawa. While we're playing, a man and a
small boy stop their bikes and peer through the fence. "What are you
doing?" chirps the boy. "We're playing croquet," someone replies. "Ah,
yes," sighs the man, "I used to play when I was a child." A couple of
minutes later the pair have cycled around the fence to the club gate.
They lean their bikes up against a bench and watch for a moment.
Within minutes, Ken Shipley has given the pair a hoop, a mallet and a
brightly coloured ball and they're practising happily at the end of
the court.

Croquet Ottawa is holding an Association tournament at the Elmdale
Lawn Bowling Club on July 26 and 27. Information on the club can be
found at http://www.magma.ca/ [tilde] acna/co.htm

Hattie Klotz is an Ottawa writer.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chris Mikula, For Style Weekly; Canadian champion
croquet player and president of Croquet Ottawa, Louis Nel lines up a
difficult shot. 'It's a game with a magical touch,' he says.; Photo:
Chris Mikula, For Style Weekly; Canadian champion croquet player and
president of Croquet Ottawa, (Louis Nel) lines up a difficult shot.
'It's a game with a magical touch,' he says.




