Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Alex Simpson <als+lics-junk@inf.ed.ac.uk>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: LICS 2004: Final CFP
Date: Mon, 19 Jan 2004 13:49:10 GMT
Lines: 187
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <200401191349.i0JDnAq31554@cuillin.inf.ed.ac.uk>
Reply-To: als+lics-junk@dcs.ed.ac.uk
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241018731 4631 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:25:31 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:25:31 +0000 (UTC)
To: LICS List <als+lics-list@inf.ed.ac.uk>
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Wed Jan 21 09:41:22 2004 -0400
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Wed, 21 Jan 2004 09:41:22 -0400
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.10)
    id 1AjIVs-00035W-00
    for categories-list@mta.ca; Wed, 21 Jan 2004 09:35:20 -0400
X-Authentication-Warning: cuillin.inf.ed.ac.uk: als set sender to als+lics-junk@inf.ed.ac.uk using -f
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 18
Status: O
Content-Length: 6747
Original-Lines: 186
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:2536
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/2536>


The deadlines for submitting to LICS 2004 are approaching:

  Titles & Short Abstracts Due : January 26, 2004
  Extended Abstracts Due       : February 2, 2004

-----

                       FINAL CALL FOR PAPERS

                 Nineteenth Annual IEEE Symposium on
                LOGIC IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (LICS 2004)

               July  14th - 17th, 2004, Turku, Finland
              http://www.lfcs.informatics.ed.ac.uk/lics/


The LICS Symposium is an annual international forum on theoretical and
practical topics in computer science that relate to logic in a broad
sense.  We invite submissions on that theme.  Suggested, but not
exclusive, topics of interest for submissions include: automata
theory, automated deduction, categorical models and logics,
concurrency and distributed computation, constraint programming,
constructive mathematics, database theory, domain theory, finite model
theory, proof theory, formal aspects of program analysis, formal
methods, hybrid systems, lambda and combinatory calculi, linear logic,
logical aspects of computational complexity, logics in artificial
intelligence, logical representation of knowledge, logics of programs,
logic programming, modal and temporal logics, model checking,
programming language semantics, reasoning about security, rewriting,
specifications, type systems and type theory, and verification.


Important Dates:
Authors are required to submit electronically a paper title and a
short abstract of about 100 words before submitting the extended
abstract of the paper.

 Titles & Short Abstracts Due : January 26, 2004
 Extended Abstracts Due       : February 2, 2004
 Author Notification          : March 27, 2004
 Camera-ready Papers Due      : April 25, 2004

All deadlines are firm; late submissions will not be considered.
Detailed information about electronic paper submission are
available from the LICS website.

Submission Instructions:
Extended abstracts must be submitted electronically in the IEEE
Proceedings two-column camera-ready format.  Each abstract must be in
English and provide sufficient detail to allow the program committee
to assess the merits of the paper. It should begin with a succinct
statement of the issues, a summary of the main results, and a brief
explanation of their significance and relevance to the conference and
to computer science, all phrased for the non-specialist.  Technical
development directed to the specialist should follow. References and
comparisons with related work should be included.  Extended abstracts
may be no longer than 10 pages including references, and must be
formatted in the IEEE Proceedings two-column camera-ready style (IEEE
style files are accessible from the LICS website).  If necessary,
detailed proofs of technical results can be included in a
clearly-labelled appendix in the same two-column format following the
10-page extended abstract. This material may be read at the discretion
of the program committee.  Extended abstracts not conforming to the
above requirements concerning format and length may be rejected
without further consideration.  The results must be unpublished and
not submitted for publication elsewhere, including the proceedings of
other symposia or workshops.  All authors of accepted papers will be
expected to sign copyright release forms.  One author of each accepted
paper will be expected to present it at the conference.


Short Presentations:
LICS 2004 will have a session of short (5--10 minutes) presentations.
This session is intended for descriptions of work in progress, student
projects, and relevant research being published elsewhere; other brief
communications may be acceptable. Submissions for these presentations,
in the form of short abstracts (1 or 2 pages long), should be entered
at the LICS 2004 submission site between March 27th and April 4th,
2004.  Authors will be notified of acceptance or rejection by April
17th, 2004.


Kleene Award for Best Student Paper:
An award in honor of the late S.C. Kleene will be given for the best
student paper, as judged by the program committee.  For a submission
to be eligible, the research presented in the paper must have been
carried out while all authors were full-time students.  The program
committee may decline to make the award or may split it among several
papers.

Affiliated Workshops:
As in previous years, there will be a number of workshops affiliated
with LICS 2004; information will be posted at the LICS website.


Program Chair:
Harald Ganzinger
MPI Informatik, Saarbruecken, Germany
http://www.mpi-sb.mpg.de/~hg/


Program Committee:
Rajeev Alur, U. of Pennsylvania
Andrew Appel, Princeton U.
Albert Atserias, UPC, Barcelona
Franz Baader, Dresden U.
Samuel Buss, U. of California, San Diego
Roberto Di Cosmo, U. de Paris VII
Gilles Dowek, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris
Harald Ganzinger, MPI, Saarbruecken (chair)
Martin Hofmann, LMU Muenchen
Achim Jung, U. of Birmingham
Kim Larsen, Aalborg U.
Leonid Libkin, U. of Toronto
Rocco de Nicola, U. di Firenze
Damian Niwinski, Warsaw U.
Prakash Panangaden, McGill U., Montreal
Albert Rubio, UPC, Barcelona
Vitaly Shmatikov, SRI International
Moshe Vardi, Rice U., Houston
Helmut Veith, TU Wien
Andrei Voronkov, U. of Manchester


Conference Chair:
Lauri Hella
Department of Math., Stat., and Phil.
Kanslerinrinne 1
33014 University of Tampere,
Finland
Email: lauri.hella@uta.fi


Workshops Chair:
Phil Scott, U. of Ottawa
Email: phil@site.uottawa.ca


Publicity Chair:
Alex Simpson, U. of Edinburgh
Email: Alex.Simpson@ed.ac.uk


General Chair:
Phokion G. Kolaitis, UC Santa Cruz
Email: kolaitis@cse.ucsc.edu


Organizing Committee:
S. Abramsky, A. Broder, E. Clarke, A. Felty,
H. Ganzinger, H. Gabow, J. Halpern, L. Hella,
U. Kohlenbach, P. Kolaitis (chair), D. Leivant,
G. Longo, H. Mairson, A. Middeldorp, J. Mitchell,
M. Nielsen, P. Panangaden, G. Plotkin,  F. Pfenning,
P. Scott, R. Shore, A. Simpson, I.A. Stewart.

Advisory Board:
Y. Gurevich, C. Kirchner, D. Kozen, U. Martin, L. Pacholski,
V. Pratt, A. Scedrov, M.Y. Vardi, G. Winskel.



Sponsorship:
The symposium is sponsored by the IEEE Technical Committee on
Mathematical Foundations of Computing in cooperation with the
Association for Symbolic Logic, and the European Association for
Theoretical Computer Science.


Invited Speakers:
The following distinguished speakers have agreed to
give invited talks at LICS 2004 :
Samson Abramsky (Oxford U.),
Robert Harper (Carnegie Mellon University),
Alexander Razborov (IAS, Princeton, and Steklov Math. Inst., Moscow),
Davide Sangiorgi (U. di Bologna),
Igor Walukiewicz (U. Bordeaux), and
Mihalis Yannakakis (Stanford U.).


Collocated events:
ICALP'04 will be collocated with LICS'04; for details see
http://www.math.utu.fi/ICALP04/.



