Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Paul Taylor <pt@cs.man.ac.uk>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Arithmetic Universes and Abstract Stone Duality
Date: Mon, 3 May 2004 23:11:21 +0100
Lines: 176
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <200405032211.i43MBLn14037@primrose.cs.man.ac.uk>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241018826 5306 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:27:06 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:27:06 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Tue May  4 08:19:25 2004 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Tue, 04 May 2004 08:19:25 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.10)
    id 1BKxlK-000306-00
    for categories-list@mta.ca; Tue, 04 May 2004 08:06:58 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 2
Status: O
Content-Length: 8387
Original-Lines: 175
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:2681
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/2681>

Arithmetic Universes and Abstract Stone Duality  --  Paul Taylor
            www.cs.man.ac.uk/~pt/ASD

(a) Inside every model of Abstract Stone Duality lies an Arithmetic Universe
(b) Every Arithmetic Universe is embedded in a model of Abstract Stone Duality.

The first is the title of a new draft paper, available from the web
page above, on which your comments are invited.  I haven't written up
the second, but the essence of the argument follows below.

The "embedding" in question is (up to equivalence) as exactly the
full subcategory of overt discrete objects.

ABSTRACT of (a):
    The first paper published on Abstract Stone Duality showed that
    the overt discrete objects (those admitting  exists  and  equality
    internally) form a pretopos, ie admit finite limits, stable disjoint
    coproducts and stable effective quotients of equivalence relations.

    Using an N-indexed least fixed point axiom, here we show that this
    full subcategory is an arithmetic universe, having a free semilattice
    (KX, "collection of Kuratowski-finite subsets") and a free monoid
    (List X, "collection of lists") on any overt discrete object.

    Each finite subset is represented by its pair ([], <>) of modal
    operators (although a tight correspondence with these depends
    on a stronger Scott-continuity axiom).  Topologically, such subsets
    are both compact and open and also involve proper open maps.
    In applications of ASD this can eliminate lists in favour of
    a continuation-passing interpretation.

The three aspects of the paper to which I would like to draw your
attention are:

    The use of modal operators is related to the three powerdomains
    (in particular to the Plotkin or convex one) in domain theory.
    The construction itself is a domain-theoretic one, as the object KX
    is constructed by means of an idempotent that is the solution of
    a fixed point equation.  A novel induction principle is needed
    to prove the modal laws from the fixed point equation.

    The final section shows how KX is a "finite powerset" in that it
    classifies Kuratowski-finite subsets or compact open subspaces of X.
    More generally, maps Gamma->KX correspond to open relations
    U subset Gamma x X for which U->Gamma is proper.

    As this paper is the first serious use of internal induction and
    recursion in ASD, it forced me to reconsider the definition of the
    natural numbers object in this category without arbitrary equalisers
    (cf my message to "categories" on 4 November).  Proof-theoretically,
    this means that the judgements in the ASD lambda-calculus must allow
    equations as well as assignments of types to variables as
    hypotheses.  Topologically, this may provide a way of extending ASD
    from locally compact locales to all locales (but as several previous
    attempts to do this have failed, I'm making no promises here).

THE CONVERSE (b) - embedding a given AU in a model of ASD.

There are numerous constructions and characterisations of categories of
domains using "bases", "information systems", "approximable relations"
etc., most notably that in Dana Scott's 1982 "Domains for Denotational
Semantics" that defined what have since become known as Scott domains.

In these, each domain is encoded as a set of tokens, possibly with
other structure such as a closure condition, and each continuous
function is encoded as a relation between tokens.

Although these constructions were almost invariably presented in very
concrete language with "set" meaning "set", the categorically astute
observer will notice that they need far less than full set theory in
the metalanguage. In fact they require
 - cartesian products (products)
 - sets of solutions of equations (equalisers)
 - disjoint unions (extensivity - stable disjoint coproducts)
 - relations considered as a notion of function
     (regularity - stable image factorisation)
 - relations considered as a notion of equality
     (exactness - stable effective quotients of equivalence relations)
 - definition by description and
 - recursion over lists (free monoids),
where the formal categorical names are given in brackets for the various
notions that are to be found in a first year "Discrete Math" course.

All but the last define a PRETOPOS, and including the last we have
an ARITHMETIC UNIVERSE (AU).

One way to construct a model of ASD around an AU would be as the
category of "abstract bases" and "abstract matrices" defined in my
paper "Computably based locally compact spaces".  (My abstract bases
are similar to the "strong proximity lattices" used by Achim Jung
and others to characterise stably locally compact spaces.)

However, such a construction would be rather difficult - and
unnecessarily so, as "Subspaces in ASD" already provides a general way
of adding the monadic property to a given category that has powers of
an object Sigma.

All we need, therefore, is a category in which the given AU embeds
as a full subcategory, in which there are powers of an object Sigma.

In classical terms, a suitable such category would be that of disjoint
unions of algebraic lattices, with Scott-continuous maps.  For
convenience, we call such a disjoint union a "predomain".

An "information system" construction would encode a predomain as a
family of sets of tokens, each set being equipped with a finitary
closure relation.  The members of the family correspond to the
components of the disjoint union. A "family of sets" can be encoded in
an AU as a single morphism, and a relation as a subobject.  The
morphisms are "approximable relations", which are also encoded as
subobjects.

This category has finite products and stable disjoint coproducts, and
the given AU is embedded as a full subcategory: an object N of the AU
becomes the predomain encoded as the N-indexed family of empty sets
(the morphism 0->N).  Sigma is encoded as the family consisting of a
single singleton (the morphism 1->1). The exponential Sigma^X exists
for any predomain X, encoded as the family whose one member is the set
of finite sets of tokens of X - this is where the free semilattice
comes in.

One striking but actually very simple property of this category
of predomains is that Sigma classifies subobjects in the AU:

    U ----> 1
    v  |    |
    |---    | top
    |   |
    v   v
    N ----> Sigma

That is, Sigma has exactly the defining property of a subobject
classifier (Omega), as if the AU were an elementary topos - except
that the object Sigma belongs to the larger category of predomains,
not to the given AU.  This property is achieved by the same sleight of
hand that often makes category theory so powerful - we may encode
objects and morphisms of a category as we please, in this case as
subobjects (it would be better to say monomorphisms) of a given category.

Besides having powers of Sigma and embedding the AU exactly as its
full subcategory of overt discrete objects, the category of predomains
obeys the Phoa principle, its morphisms are all Scott continuous and
its objects are Sigma-split subspaces of Sigma^N.  Its "monadic
completion" (using "Subspaces in ASD") is therefore exactly the
kind of category that is discussed in "Computably based locally
compact spaces".

In particular, no new overt discrete objects are added by these
constructions: the given AU is embedded (up to equivalence) as
exactly the full subcategory of overt discrete objects.


It seems to me that the "equivalence" between AUs and ASD that is
established by these two results should be very significant.  Andre'
Joyal originally introduced AUs because they are the minimal natural
categorical structure in which one can form the free internal thing of
the same kind.  Since any AU can be embedded in a model of ASD, we can
use domain theoretic methods (of which my new paper is a clumsy simple
example) to construct free internal algebras (including free
categories) and cofree internal coalgebras.  The semantics of WHILE
programs given in "first order" terms using coequalisers in Section
6.4 of "Practical Foundations" is really the same thing as the better
known "higher order" domain-theoretic fixed point semantics. On the
other hand, we may construct the free internal AU as a subcategory of
the free internal model of ASD.

Paul Taylor
www.cs.man.ac.uk/~pt
pt@cs.man.ac.uk
University of Manchester ("East London Campus")






