Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Markus Kirchberg <M.Kirchberg@massey.ac.nz>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: CFP: FoIKS 2008
Date: Wed, 25 Jul 2007 07:55:50 +1200 (NZST)
Lines: 214
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1IDkQi-000383-7H@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019555 10536 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:39:15 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:39:15 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Wed Jul 25 14:22:23 2007 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Wed, 25 Jul 2007 14:22:23 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1IDkQi-000383-7H
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Wed, 25 Jul 2007 14:13:44 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 35
Status: O
Content-Length: 8910
Original-Lines: 213
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:3841
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/3841>


                     C A L L    F O R    P A P E R S
                    ---------------------------------

                      Fifth International Symposium

                                    on

             Foundations of Information and Knowledge Systems

                               (FoIKS 2008)

                   February 11-15, 2008 -- Pisa, Italy

                          http://2008.foiks.org/


The FoIKS symposia provide a biennial forum for presenting and
discussing theoretical and applied research on information and knowledge
systems. The goal is to bring together researchers with an interest in
this subject, share research experiences, promote collaboration and
identify new issues and directions for future research.

FoIKS 2008 solicits original contributions dealing with any foundational
aspect of information and knowledge systems, including submissions from
researchers working in fields such as discrete mathematics, logic and
algebra, model theory, information theory, complexity theory,
algorithmics and computation, statistics and optimisation who are
interested in applying their ideas, theories and methods to research on
information and knowledge systems.

Previous FoIKS symposia were held in Budapest (Hungary) in 2006, Vienna
(Austria) in 2004, Schloss Salzau near Kiel (Germany) in 2002, and
Burg/Spreewald near Berlin (Germany) in 2000. FoIKS took up the
tradition of the conference series Mathematical Fundamentals of Database
Systems (MFDBS), which initiated East-West collaboration in the field of
database theory. Former MFDBS conferences were held in Rostock (Germany)
in 1991, Visegrad (Hungary) in 1989, and Dresden (Germany) in 1987.

The FoIKS symposia are a forum for intensive discussions. Speakers are
given sufficient time to present their results, expound relevant
background information and put their research into context. Furthermore,
participants are asked in advance to prepare as correspondents to a
contribution of another author.

Suggested topics include, but are not limited to:

     * Database Design: formal models, dependency theory, schema
       translations, desirable properties;
     * Dynamics of Information and Knowledge Systems: models of
       transactions, models of interaction, updates, consistency
       preservation, concurrency control;
     * Information Integration: heterogeneous data, views, schema
       dominance and equivalence;
     * Integrity and Constraint Management: verification, validation, and
       enforcement of consistency, triggers;
     * Intelligent Agents: multi-agent systems, autonomous agents,
       foundations of software agents, cooperative agents;
     * Knowledge Discovery and Information Retrieval: machine learning,
       data mining, text mining, information extraction;
     * Knowledge Representation: planning, reasoning techniques,
       description logics, knowledge and belief, belief revision and
       update, non-monotonic formalisms, uncertainty;
     * Logics in Databases and AI: non-classical logics, spatial and
       temporal logics, probabilistic logics, deontic logic, logic
       programming;
     * Mathematical Foundations: discrete structures and algorithms,
       graphs, grammars, automata, abstract machines, finite model
       theory, information theory;
     * Security and Risk Management in Information and Knowledge Systems:
       privacy, trust, cryptography, steganography, information hiding;
     * Semi-Structured Data and XML: data modelling, data processing,
       data compression, data exchange;
     * Social and Collaborative Computing: symbiotic intelligence,
       self-organisation, knowledge flow, decision making;
     * The Semantic Web and Knowledge Management: languages, ontologies,
       agents, adaption, intelligent algorithms; and
     * The WWW: models of Web databases, Web dynamics, Web services, Web
       transactions and negotiations.


SUBMISSION OF PAPERS
--------------------

Papers must be typeset using the Springer-Verlag LaTeX2e style llncs for
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (refer http://2008.foiks.org/). The
suggested number of pages is 16, and the maximum number of pages is 18.
Submissions which deviate substantially from these guidelines may be
rejected without review. Initial submissions must be in PDF format, but
authors should keep in mind that the LaTeX2e source must be submitted
for the final versions of accepted papers. Submissions in alternate
formats, such as Microsoft Word, cannot be accepted for either initial
or final versions. The submissions will be judged for scientific quality
and for suitability as a basis for broader discussion. The proceedings
will be published by Springer-Verlag in the Lecture Notes in Computer
Science series and will be available at the symposium.

After the symposium authors of selected papers will be asked to prepare
extended versions of their papers for publication in a special issue of
the journal Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence.

Electronic Submission
---------------------

Submission to FoIKS 2008 will be electronically only. Authors are asked
to create a submission system account first. Subsequently, this account
can be used to submit one or more abstracts and upload corresponding
papers.

The online submission system will be available from late-July 2007.


IMPORTANT DATES
---------------

Abstract submission deadline:  August 15, 2007 (extended)
Paper submission deadline:     August 22, 2007 (extended)
Author notification:           October 15, 2007
Camera ready paper due:        November 12, 2007
Early registration due:        January 31, 2008
Late registration:             from February 01, 2008
Symposium in Pisa, Italy:      February, 11-15 2008


CONFERENCE CHAIRS
-----------------

Program Committee Co-Chairs
---------------------------

Sven Hartmann
Massey University, New Zealand

Gabriele Kern-Isberner
University of Dortmund, Germany

Local Arrangements Chair
------------------------

Carlo Meghini
Istituto di Scienza e Tecnologie dell'Informazione, Italy

Publicity Chair
---------------

Markus Kirchberg
Massey University, New Zealand


PROGRAM COMMITTEE
-----------------

Rudolf Ahlswede, University of Bielefeld, Germany
Catriel Beeri, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
Leopoldo Bertossi, Carleton University, Canada
Joachim Biskup, University of Dortmund, Germany
Stefan Brass, University of Halle, Germany
Cristian S. Calude, University of Auckland, New Zealand
John Cantwell, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Samir Chopra, City University of New York, USA
James P. Delgrande, Simon Fraser University, Canada
Juergen Dix, Clausthal University of Technology, Germany
Rod Downey, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Thomas Eiter, Vienna University of Technology, Austria
Lluis Godo Lacasa, Institut d'Investigacioen Intel.ligencia Artificial,
                    Spain
Stephen J. Hegner, Umea University, Sweden
Anthony Hunter, University College London, UK
Hyunchul Kang, Chung-Ang University Seoul, Korea
Odej Kao, Berlin University of Technology, Germany
Gyula O. H. Katona, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Hungary
Hans-Joachim Klein, University of Kiel, Germany
Dexter Kozen, Cornell University, USA
Jerome Lang, Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse, France
Uwe Leck, University of Wisconsin, USA
Mark Levene, Birbeck University of London, UK
Sebastian Link, Massey University, New Zealand
Yue Lu, East China Normal University Shanghai, China
Thomas Lukasiewicz, Universita di Roma "La Sapienza", Italy
Carlo Meghini, Istituto di Scienza e Tecnologie dell'Informazione, Italy
Peter Mika, Yahoo! Research Barcelona, Spain
Wilfred S. H. Ng, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China
Beng Chin Ooi, National University of Singapore
Jeff B. Paris, University of Manchester, UK
Henri Prade, Universite Paul Sabatier, France
Attila Sali, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Hungary
Vladimir Sazonov, University of Liverpool, UK
Klaus-Dieter Schewe, Massey University, New Zealand
Karl Schlechta, Universite de Provence, France
Dietmar Seipel, University of Wuerzburg, Germany
Guillermo R. Simari, Universidad Nacional del Sur, Argentina
Nicolas Spyratos, University of Paris-South, France
Ernest Teniente, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Spain
Bernhard Thalheim, University of Kiel, Germany
Yannis Theodoridis, University of Piraeus, Greece
Miroslav Truszczynski, University of Kentucky, USA
Jose Maria Turull-Torres, Massey University Wellington, New Zealand
Dirk Van Gucht, Indiana University, USA
Marina de Vos, University of Bath, UK
Jef Wijsen, University of Mons-Hainaut, Belgium
Ian H. Witten, University of Waikato, New Zealand
Jeffrey Xu Yu, Chinese University of Hong Kong, China


FURTHER INFORMATION
-------------------

For further information refer to the FoIKS 2008 Web-site at

       http://2008.foiks.org/




