Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: "George Janelidze" <janelg@telkomsa.net>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Re: Help!
Date: Sun, 7 Oct 2007 10:09:19 +0200
Lines: 110
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1IeWUo-0000iP-SA@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019627 11087 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:40:27 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:40:27 +0000 (UTC)
To: "Categories list" <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Sun Oct  7 10:53:14 2007 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Sun, 07 Oct 2007 10:53:14 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1IeWUo-0000iP-SA
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 07 Oct 2007 10:48:38 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 15
Status: O
Content-Length: 5578
Original-Lines: 109
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:3958
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/3958>

Dear Michael,

The question is so impossibly big, and it was asked and answered in various
form so many times, and no responsibility for the originality/completeness
of the answer can be assumed... So, I am not afraid to begin with a few
obvious remarks, looking forward to seeing many other remarks from others:

1. Many people believe that mathematics is about mathematical structures,
but what is a mathematical structure in general? According to Bourbaki, one
should begin with two finite sequences of sets, say, A, B, C,... and X, Y,
Z,...; let us call them constant sets and variable sets respectively. Then
build any scale, which is a finite sequence of sets obtained by taking
finite products and power sets of the sets above. Then, (briefly and
roughly!) call a structure (of a fixed type) an element of one of the sets
in the scale satisfying certain conditions. For example:

(a) a topological space (defined via open sets) has no constant sets, one
variable set X, and its structure is an element t in PP(X) that is closed
under finite intersections and arbitrary unions.

(b) a vector space has one constant set A ("the set of scalars"), one
variable set X ("the set of vectors"), and its structure can be defined as
element (a,b,c,d) of P(AxAxA)xP(AxAxA)xP(AxXxX)P(XxXxX), where a, b, c, d
are addition of scalars, multiplication of scalars, scalar (-on-vector)
multiplication, and addition of vectors respectively; that (a,b,c,d) should
satisfy familiar conditions of course.

Then, according to Bourbaki again, structures are useless without
morphisms - but what is a morphism? It turns out that only isomorphisms can
be defined, and the class of morphisms should in each case be CHOSEN
depending on the "experience" of working with a given class of structures in
such a way, that it is closed under composition and contains all
isomorphisms (or, better, also determine isomorphisms as invertible
morphisms). Is it possible that the most fundamental concept of mathematics
is described as such a monster? Is not it better to study abstract
categories?

And what is the problem of defining morphisms? To answer this question one
should learn about functors, covariant and contravariant ones, and what do
they preserve and what not.

2. Set theory is wonderful: it gives precise mathematical definitions to
concepts that were only intuitively understood before. But... it often makes
definitions complicated. And category theory very often solves this problem
by using universal properties. For example the set N - better to say, the
structure (N,0,s) - of natural numbers is "designed to count"; therefore N
should have the first element 0 (unfortunately 0 is better than 1) and the
successor function s from N to N - and be "the best such", i.e. initial
such. Moreover, developing basic properties of this structure out of
initiality is much easier than out of Peano axioms. In fact all classical
number systems have simple elegant definitions via universal properties.
Moreover, the axioms of set theory itself are much less elegant than their
elementary-topos-theoretic counterparts.

3. We can say that set theory is more fundamental than arithmetics: e.g.
children learn addition by counting the number of elements in the disjoint
union. But category theory is more fundamental than set theory: e.g. it
makes the disjoint union a more natural operation... but, more importantly

(a) we all know that, say, a+b=b+a, ab=ba, PvQ<=>QvP,... for all natural
numbers a and b and all logical formulas P and Q - but one needs category
theory to see these as the same result (and we can add cartesian products,
free product, intersection, union, and many other operations to it).

(b) or, say, we all know that composites of injections are injections and
composites of surjections are surjections - but again, one needs category
theory to see these as the same result;

(c) and even exponentiation and implication are the same... and categorical
logic follows...

4. Linear algebra tells us that instead of working with linear
transformations of finite-dimensional vector spaces we can work with
matrices, but one cannot formulate this properly without using the concept
of equivalence of categories (the category of finite-dimensional K-vector
spaces is equivalent to the category of natural numbers with matrices with
entries from K as morphisms). And there are so many other equivalences and
dualities (that are not isomorphisms) playing fundamental roles in various
branches of mathematics. Not to mention that the aforementioned matrices
themselves arise from a categorical observation (finite products = finite
coproducts).

5. Proper understanding of Eilenberg - Mac Lane work, and the work of their
followers, friends, and not-quite-friends in category theory and proper
understanding of what the 21st century mathematics would be without it
obviously requires far better knowledge of mathematics than the 21st century
students have. But may be we should at least say that our Fields Medal
(Grothendieck) is not less than any other Fields Medal...

George Janelidze

----- Original Message -----
From: "Michael Barr" <barr@math.mcgill.ca>
To: "Categories list" <categories@mta.ca>
Sent: Friday, October 05, 2007 2:52 PM
Subject: categories: Help!


> What would you say to an undergraduate math club about categories?  I have
> been thinking about it, but I am not sure what to say.  Talk about
> cohomology, which is what motivated E-M?  I don't think so.  Talk about
> dual spaces of finite-dimensional vector spaces?  Maybe, but then what?
>
> Michael






