Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: ICLP 08 <iclp08pub@cs.nmsu.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: ICLP'08 CALL FOR PAPERS
Date: Wed, 2 Jan 2008 15:00:31 -0700
Lines: 206
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1JASwp-0001fj-7k@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019743 11878 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:42:23 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:42:23 +0000 (UTC)
To: undisclosed-recipients:;
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Thu Jan  3 12:42:45 2008 -0400
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Thu, 03 Jan 2008 12:42:45 -0400
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1JASwp-0001fj-7k
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Thu, 03 Jan 2008 12:29:35 -0400
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 2
Status: O
Content-Length: 8894
Original-Lines: 205
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4141
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4141>

                             FIRST CALL FOR PAPERS
                                    ICLP'08

              24th International Conference on Logic Programming
                     Udine, Italy, December 9th-13th, 2008
                          http://iclp08.dimi.uniud.it


CONFERENCE SCOPE
----------------
Since  the  first  conference  held  in  Marseilles  in 1982, ICLP has been the
premier  international conference for presenting research in logic programming.
Contributions (papers, position papers, and posters) are sought in all areas of
logic programming including but not restricted to:

* Theory: Semantic Foundations, Formalisms, Nonmonotonic Reasoning,
   Knowledge Representation.
* Implementation: Compilation, Memory Management, Virtual Machines, Parallelism.
*  Environments:  Program  Analysis,  Program  Transformation,  Validation  and
   Verification, Debugging, Profiling, Integration.
* Language  Issues:  Extensions, Integration with Other Paradigms, Concurrency,
   Modularity,  Objects,  Coordination,  Mobility,  Higher Order, Types, Modes,
   Programming Techniques.
* Related Paradigms:  Abductive Logic Programming, Inductive Logic Programming,
   Constraint Logic Programming, Answer-Set Programming.
* Applications:   Databases,    Data   Integration  and   Federation,  Software
   Engineering,  Natural  Language  Processing,  Web  and Semantic Web, Agents,
   Artificial Intelligence, Bioinformatics

The three broad categories for submissions are:
   (1) Technical papers,  providing  novel research  contributions,  innovative
       perspectives  on the field,  and/or novel integrations  across different
       areas;
   (2) Application  papers,  describing  innovative uses  of  logic programming
       technology in real-world application domains;
   (3) Posters, ideal for presenting and discussing current work, not yet ready
       for publication, for PhD thesis summaries and research project overviews.

A  separate  session  dedicated  to  the celebration of the 20th anniversary of
stable model semantics will also be part of the program.

Accepted  papers and posters will be allocated time for presentation during the
conference.  At  least  one  author  of each accepted submission is expected to
register and participate in the event.

In  addition  to papers and posters, the technical program will include invited
talks,  advanced  tutorials,  specialized  sessions,  workshops, and a Doctoral
Student  Consortium.  Details,  as  they  become  available  will be posted at:

                          http://iclp08.dimi.uniud.it

PAPERS AND POSTERS
------------------
Papers and posters must describe original, previously unpublished research, and
must  not  be simultaneously submitted for publication elsewhere. Emphasis will
be  placed  on  the  novelty  and innovative nature of the results (even if not
completely polished and refined).
All  submissions  will  be peer-reviewed by an international panel. Submissions
MUST contain substantial original, unpublished material.
All  submissions  must  be written in English. Technical papers and application
papers must not exceed 15 pages in the Springer LNCS format

                   (see http://www.springeronline.com/lncs/)

The limit for posters is 5 pages in the same format.

The  primary  means  of  submission  will  be electronic, through the Easychair
submission system. The submission page is available at

               http://www.easychair.org/conferences/?conf=ICLP08


PUBLICATION
-----------
The  proceedings  of the conference will be published by Springer-Verlag in the
LNCS  series.  All  accepted  papers  and  posters  will  be  included  in  the
proceedings.

WORKSHOPS
---------
The  ICLP'08  program will include several workshops. They are perhaps the best
place  for  the  presentation  of  preliminary  work, novel ideas, and new open
problems  to  a more focused and specialized audience. Workshops also provide a
venue  for  presenting  specialised  topics  and  opportunities  for  intensive
discussions   and   project   collaboration  in  any  areas  related  to  logic
programming, including cross-disciplinary areas.

DOCTORAL CONSORTIUM
-------------------
The  Doctoral  Consortium  (DC)  on  Logic  Programming  is  the  4th  Doctoral
consortium  to  provide  doctoral  students with the opportunity to present and
discuss  their  research directions, and to obtain feedback from both peers and
word-renown  experts  in the field. The DC will also offer invited speakers and
panel discussions. Accepted participants will receive partial financial support
to  attend  the  event and the main conference. The best paper and presentation
from  the DC will be given the opportunity to present in special session of the
main ICLP conference.

CELEBRATING 20th YEARS OF STABLE MODEL SEMANTICS
------------------------------------------------
The year 2008 marks the 20th anniversary of the publication that introduced the
stable  model semantics for logic programs with negation. The paper titled "The
stable  semantics for logic programs" by Michael Gelfond and Vladimir Lifschitz
was  presented  at  ICLP-1988.  It  was  a  momentous event that gave rise to a
vibrant  subfield of logic programming known now as the answer-set programming.
Its  distinguishing  aspects  are  close connections to the fields of knowledge
representation,   satisfiability   and  constraint  satisfaction,  ever  faster
computational tools, and a growing list of successful applications.

To  celebrate  the  stable-model  semantics, there will be a special session at
ICLP  2008  dedicated to answer-set programming. The session will feature talks
by  Michael  Gelfond  and  Vladimir  Lifschitz.  as  well  as  by  other  major
contributions   to   the   field,   presenting  personal  perspectives  on  the
stable-model  semantics,  its  impact  and  its  future.  There will be a panel
discussion,  and  regular  accepted  ICLP  papers  falling  into the answer-set
programming area will complete the program.


CONFERENCE VENUE
----------------
The conference will be held in the city of Udine, the capital of the historical
region  of  Friuli, Italy. Located between the Adriatic sea and the Alps, close
to  Venice,  Austria  and Slovenia, Udine is a city of Roman origins, funded by
Emperor  Otto  in  983.  Rich of historical sites, Udine is also famous for its
commercial  and  shopping  opportunities  and its outstanding wine and culinary
traditions.

SUPPORT SPONSORING AND AWARDS
-----------------------------
The conference is sponsored by the Association for Logic Programming (ALP). The
ALP  has  funds  to  assist  financially disadvantaged participants. The ALP is
planning  to sponsor two awards for ICLP 2008: for the best technical paper and
for the best student paper.

IMPORTANT DATES
---------------                 Papers          Posters
Abstract submission deadline    June 2nd        n/a
Submission deadline             June 9th        August 15th
Notification of authors         August 1st      September 1st
Camera-ready copy due           September 15th  September 15th
20 Years of Stable Models       TBA
Doctoral Consortium             TBA
Workshop Proposals              June 2nd
Early-bird Registration         TBA
Conference                      December 9-13, 2008


ICLP'2008 ORGANIZATION
----------------------
General Chair:
   Agostino Dovier (University of Udine)

Program Co-Chairs:
   Maria Garcia de la Banda (Monash University)
   Enrico Pontelli (New Mexico State University)

Workshop Chair:
   Tran Cao Son (New Mexico State University)

Doctoral Student Consortium:
   David Warren (SUNY Stony Brook)
   Tom Schrijvers (K.U.Leuven)

Publicity Co-Chairs:
   Marcello Balduccini  (Kodak Research Labs)
   Alessandro Dal Palu' (University of Parma)

Programming Competition Chair:
   Bart Demoen (K.U.Leuven)

20 Years of Stable Models:
   Mirek Truszczynski (University of Kentucky)
   Andrea Formisano (University of Perugia)

Program Committee:
   Salvador Abreu           Sergio Antoy
   Pedro Barahona           Chitta Baral
   Gerhard Brewka           Manuel Carro
   Michael Codish           Alessandro Dal Palu'
   Bart Demoen              Agostino Dovier
   John Gallagher           Michael Gelfond
   Carmen Gervet            Gopal Gupta
   Manuel Hermenegildo      Andy King
   Michael Maher            Juan Moreno Navarro
   Alberto Pettorossi       Brigitte Pientka
   Gianfranco Rossi         Fariba Sadri
   Vitor Santos Costa       Tran Cao Son
   Paolo Torroni            Frank Valencia
   Mark Wallace

Web Master:
   Raffaele Cipriano

Local Arrangements Committee:
   Alberto Casagrande
   Elisabetta De Maria
   Luca Di Gaspero
   Carla Piazza


----------------------------------------------------
For further information: iclp08@cs.nmsu.edu
                         http://iclp08.dimi.uniud.it



