Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Colin McLarty <colin.mclarty@case.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Re: replacing set theory
Date: Thu, 13 Mar 2008 09:52:25 -0400
Lines: 96
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1JZyNE-0002yD-RN@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019861 12685 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:44:21 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:44:21 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Thu Mar 13 22:13:29 2008 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Thu, 13 Mar 2008 22:13:29 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1JZyNE-0002yD-RN
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Thu, 13 Mar 2008 22:06:16 -0300
Content-Language: en
Content-Disposition: inline
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 69
Status: RO
Content-Length: 4662
Original-Lines: 95
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4305
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4305>

Wednesday, March 12, 2008 11:37 pm
Subject: Re: categories: Re: replacing set theory

Writes of the replacement scheme in categorical set theory

> But it doesn't seem to be *well* known any more, or at least
> well-disseminated and exposited.  Several people have told me that
> they didn't think it was possible to express replacement
> category-theoretically without using a category of classes.

There are two issues here, because there are two things to mean by
"replacing set theory."

On one hand it can mean replacing the membership-theoretic approach of
ZF by the categorical approach of ETCS.  This has long been routine and
full details are found in Osius "Categorical Set theory: A
Characterization of the Category of Sets", (Journal of Pure and Applied
Algebra, 1974, pages 79--119).  People do not talk about it a lot
because it was a well-focussed problem which got a perfectly good answer
and at the time there more pressing and more open-ended research issues.

Perhaps also because Saunders Mac~Lane tended to stress that lots of
higher set theory (like lots of logic in general) is very weakly linked
to most of mathematics -- which is true, but is not to say that higher
set theory (or logic in general) need be abandoned.  He hoped they could
be brought back into better touch.

This is the issue raised for example by Feferman and Rao in Giandomenico
Sica ed. _What is category theory?_ {Polimetrica, 2006) when they claim
it is "unclear" whether certain ZF constructions can be given at all in
categorical terms.  Yes, it is clear they can, proven in detail by Osius
in 1976 (not the first proof but my favorite reference on it).


On the other hand, for some purposes we want to replace the category Set
(no matter how it is axiomatized) by something more general, often by
any elementary topos, or it could be any Boolean topos, or category with
a category of classes.

The categorical replacement scheme I mentioned generalizes very well to
any well-pointed topos, but that is little more general than Set.

It makes much use of fibers over global elements.  To put it in the
terms I like, it does nothing to say a family of sets S-->I defined by
replacement should be "smooth" or "continuous over the index set I" in
anyway.  In Set the index *set* is not smooth or continuous to begin
with, it is a discrete set.

The idea of categories of classes is to get some sense of large
collections that *do* vary "smoothly" or "continuously" when the base
has some smooth or continuous character (in a very general sense, so for
example effective computability is the relevant "smoothness" for those
types in the effective topos close to the natural numbers).

The next question brings us back to the first perspective.  It is about
the category Set, but wants to approach that category by categorical tools.

> This raises another question.  You mention at the end of this paper
> that large-cardinal axioms are "routinely pursued in
> isomorphism-invariant terms".  This is clear to me for many types of
> large cardinals, but not for the stronger ones that involve elementary
> embeddings of the universe of sets.  Ultrapowers have a categorical
> analogue, of course (filterquotient) but then there is a transitive
> collapse of the entire universe, from which I don't see immediately
> how to eliminate the global membership predicate.  Can you give a clue
> or a reference?

Within ZF itself the global membership predicate X \in S is just one
guise of the relation "the membership-tree of X is (isomorphic to) the
restriction of the membership-tree of S to some node directly below the
top."  Transitive collapse can be re-cast in these terms as dealing with
all well-founded extensional relations and not only dealing with
restricted membership (i.e. restricted to some inner model of ZF) and
actual membership of sets.

In isomorphism invariant terms, a transitive collapse of the universe
means a uniform method of taking any well-founded extensional relation
(not just ZF membership on each transitive closure) and restricting it
to a sub-relation which is still well-founded and extensional (which we
do not bother collapsing to membership on some transitive closure) while
preserving some properties of the first relation.  And then we ask if a
given collapse has any fixed points: are there any well-founded
extensional relation so big that this collapse leaves an isomorphic
relation?

I have no idea what the practical effect would be of recasting collapse
in these terms.  I have never worked with large cardinals and transitive
collapse.  But it certainly *can* be recast this way.  Some one should
try it.

best, Colin





