Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Paul Taylor <pt08@PaulTaylor.EU>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: replacement and the gluing construction
Date: Sun, 16 Mar 2008 15:46:42 +0000
Lines: 127
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1Jb3ZG-0005p9-R6@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0 (Apple Message framework v624)
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019869 12739 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:44:29 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:44:29 +0000 (UTC)
To: Categories list <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Sun Mar 16 21:56:30 2008 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Sun, 16 Mar 2008 21:56:30 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1Jb3ZG-0005p9-R6
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 16 Mar 2008 21:51:10 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 82
Status: O
Content-Length: 6764
Original-Lines: 126
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4318
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4318>

The words "internal", "external" and "definable" has been used in this
discussion of the axiom scheme of replacement, but I believe that we
have to be very careful in using them.

So far as I can gather, Thomas Streicher is still discussing the
"sets and classes" view of replacement.  At any rate, I cannot see
what he might mean categorically by saying that
 > an external family of objects is a function I -> Ob(EE) where I is a
set
unless his Ob(EE) is a "class" in either the sense of algebraic set
theory (ie an object in another category besides EE) or some similar
approach.

AST is an intellectually valid point of view on which much good
category theory has been done in the past few years.  However,
Mike Shulman and I would both like to know how one might formulate
replacement WITHOUT classes.   If I have misunderstood you, Thomas,
then I apologise, but this is an important and difficult topic, so
more and clearer explanation is always valuable.  If I, who have
thought about this myself, do not follow you, then nor do many of
the other readers of this forum.

Before explaining why I think the word "definable" is also dangerous,
let me repeat something about the difference between set theory and
category theory.  In a word, they say that they are describing
mathematical objects up to equality, whilst we say that this can only
be done up to isomorphism.  However, in the context of replacement in
particular, this means that we may end up talking completely at cross
purposes.  As I said before, they claim that replacement is necessary
to construct the ordinal omega+omega, whilst this order structure can
be constructed up to isomorphism very easily without it.

But consider the example of the N-indexed sequence of iterated powersets
of N.  The structure that Replacement yields is, up to isomorphism,
just N itself, but the force of the axiom-scheme in set theory is that
the elements of this set are the iterated powersets.

I am not inclined to believe that Cantor understood the strength of
replacement when he stated in 1899 that "two equivalent [ie bijective]
multiplicities are either both sets or both equalivalent",  because
his mathematical beliefs were an extreme form of Platonism, and the
appreciation of the strength of logic theories simply did not exist
at the time.   Also, Fraenkel made a mistake in his first attempt
to formulate Replacement, saying something that was already derivable
from Zermelo's set theory.

I believe that, in order to grasp the meaning of Replacement and then
formulate it in categorical language, we first have to have a clear
understanding of the ways in which we make "definitions" and then
implement them.  The distinction between planning and execution is
very clear if you're building a house, but often very difficult to
make in mathematical research.

Instead of logic, let's consider algebra.  You can define the notion
of group using (1) just the symbols for identity and binary
multiplication.  Or, you can have (2) multiplications symbols of all
arities, but still with a single result; this is called the "clone".
Next, you can form (3) families of products; this is the "Lawvere
theory".  There are also (4) the category of all groups and (5) the
classifying topos.  Of these, (1) is finite, (2,3) require the natural
numbers or an axiom of infinity, and (4,5) require a set theory.
In some sense, they all capture the same algebraic notion, but
foundationally, something more is needed to prove their equivalence.

Thomas Streicher uses indexed/fibred category theory to link internal
and external notions.  I don't see, however, how he manages to give
the SPECIFICATION that a display map X-->N is the sequence of iterates
of the powerset on N.  The formulation that I gave at the end of my
previous posting and in Remark 9.6.16 in my book does do this.

Earlier in this thread, Paul Levy said,

 > I'd also like to suggest that "foundations" is being used in
 > two very different senses.  In FoM, it's about quantifying the
 > philosophical risks involved in particular formal systems and
 > proofs, i.e. issues such as relative consistency, omega-consistency,
 > etc.  For this purpose the primacy of membership vs composition is
 > quite immaterial. One could, I suppose, make a formal theory based
 > on composition equal in strength (in whatever sense) to ZF.

There are two important ideas in category theory that have something
to say about consistency:
(1) Andre' Joyal's categorical formulation of Godel's INCOMPLETENESS
     theorem;  this compares
     - PROVABILITY, in the form of the internal term or free model of
       the system (an arithmetic universe, but it could equally be an
       elementary topos) with
     - TRUTH in the world within which this is constructed; and
(2) the Artin gluing / Freyd cover / scone (Sierpinski cone) / logical
     relations construction,  which can be used to prove CONSISTENCY
     of various theories, once again by comparing the term model with
     the ambient universe.

Whilst writing a book is career suicide, it does have the intellectual
value of forcing one to reconcile apparently conflicting results like
these.  (See sections 7.7 and 9.6 of my book.)

The gluing construction works because it uses the axiom-scheme of
replacement.  Thomas Streicher and Thorsten Altenkirch, who have
contributed to the present thread, have written papers about this
construction and its applications.  Did they or anybody else draw
attention to the need for Replacement in their work on this
construction?

Categorically, the gluing construction is a comma category that, in
the applications to consistency, combines the "semantic" category (eg
Set, with Replacement) with the "syntactic" one (the free one,
constructed from the types, terms and proofs of the theory under
consideration).  Roughly speaking, the comma category inherits any
structure that both of the original categories had, and the projection
to the syntactic category preserves it.  Since the syntactic category
is the free one, it therefoe has a unique (up to unique iso)
structure-preserving functor to the comma category. Combined with the
projection to the semantic category, this yields an internal model in
which the type constructors (powerset, for example) of the theory are
interpreted as the actual semantic powersets or whatever.

Steve Awodey, Bill Lawvere, Colin McLarty and Thomas Streicher have
presented various views on Replacement.  In order that the rest of us
might get a better understanding of what each of them means, and how
their points of view are related, I invite them each to give an
explanation of this foundational aspect of the gluing construction, as
they would formulate it according to their respective points of view.




