Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Michel Schellekens <m.schellekens@cs.ucc.ie>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: PhD positions and Post Doc position at CEOL
Date: Fri, 13 Jun 2008 15:20:41 +0100
Lines: 145
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1K7KiE-0001x7-SA@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241019939 13245 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:45:39 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:45:39 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca, Michel Schellekens <m.schellekens@cs.ucc.ie>
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Fri Jun 13 22:44:16 2008 -0300
Return-path: <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Fri, 13 Jun 2008 22:44:16 -0300
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <cat-dist@mta.ca>)
	id 1K7KiE-0001x7-SA
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Fri, 13 Jun 2008 22:37:50 -0300
Original-Sender: cat-dist@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 7
Status: O
Content-Length: 5471
Original-Lines: 144
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4425
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4425>

Science Foundation Ireland funded PhD and Post Doc positions
Centre for Efficiency-Oriented Languages, CEOL


CEOL, Department of Computer Science, University College Cork and the
Department of Microelectronics, University College Cork have five PhD
openings and one Post Doc position.

PhD positions:
Salary: 16,000 Euro per annum (tax free)
(Tuition fees will be paid by centre)
Duration up to four years, subject to performance.


Post Doc position:
Salary: 40,000 - 48,600 Euro per annum
(Exclusive of pension contribution which is provided separately by UCC)
Salary in relation to prior experience.
Duration to be discussed with candidates.


Project duration:
Four years.
Starting date: August to October, 2008.
(To be discussed with candidates.)


Institute/Centre Background:
University College Cork, UCC, is one of the top universities in Ireland.
It has a large Computer Science department, including a variety of
research groups, several of which are funded by Science Foundation
Ireland (www.sfi.ie).

The Centre for Efficiency Oriented Languages developed the novel
programming paradigm MOQA (MOdular Quantiative Analysis). Information on
MOQA can be found in the Springer book: A Modular Calculus for the
Average Cost of Data Structuring (abstract copied below):

http://www.springer.com/computer/foundations/book/978-0-387-73383-8

Further information is available from www.ceol.ucc.ie

The CEOL project started in 2003 following a Science Foundation Ireland
award and continues with renewed funding from SFI. CEOL attracted
funding from other sources, including the Industrial Development Agency
and collaborates with various industries, including Sun, Synopsys and
Xilinx.


Project Background:
Expanding the scope and applicability of static average-case analysis
via MOQA.

The current project is in collaboration with the Department of
Microelectronics.
Principal Investigator: Michel Schellekens
Co-Principal Investigator: Emanuel Popovici

The project builds on fundamental advances in static average-case
analysis to expand the scope and applicability of static average-case
analysis tools, with a focus on average timing and average power
analysis for hardware-software systems.


PhD candidates are sought with one or more of the following backgrounds:
Analysis of algorithms
Static and dynamic time/power analysis
Programming skills (language/tool implementation)
Digital design
Semantics
Average-case and worst-case analysis of Hardware-Software systems
Mathematics (in conjuction with Computer Science background): preference
on probability background/discrete methods.


Post Doc candidate is sought with one or more of the following backgrounds:
Asynchronous Digital Design, average-case, worst-case analysis for
Hardware-Software Systems, Real-Time systems and applications.


Candidates should send their CV's to the CEOL Administrator: Caitriona Walsh
Email address: cw7@cs.ucc.ie

Background Information:
Springer Book in relation to CEOL project (Due: August 2008)

A Modular Calculus for the Average Cost of Data Structuring
Schellekens, Michel
2008, 20 illus. With CD-ROM., Hardcover
ISBN: 978-0-387-73383-8

A Modular Calculus for the Average Cost of Data Structuring introduces
MOQA, a new domain-specific programming language which guarantees the
average-case time analysis of its programs to be modular. "Time" in this
context refers to a broad notion of cost, which can be used to estimate
the actual running time, but also other quantitative information such as
power consumption, while modularity means that the average time of a
program can be easily computed from the times of its
constituents--something that no programming language of this scope has
been able to guarantee so far. MOQA principles can be incorporated in
any standard programming language.

MOQA supports tracking of data and their distributions throughout
computations, based on the notion of random bag preservation. This
allows a unified approach to average-case time analysis, and resolves
fundamental bottleneck problems in the area. The main techniques are
illustrated in an accompanying Flash tutorial, where the visual nature
of this method can provide new teaching ideas for algorithms courses.

This volume, with forewords by Greg Bollella and Dana Scott, presents
novel programs based on the new advances in this area, including the
first randomness-preserving version of Heapsort. Programs are provided,
along with derivations of their average-case time, to illustrate the
radically different approach to average-case timing. The automated
static timing tool applies the Modular Calculus to extract the
average-case running time of programs directly from their MOQA code.

A Modular Calculus for the Average Cost of Data Structuring is designed
for a professional audience composed of researchers and practitioners in
industry, with an interest in algorithmic analysis and also static
timing and power analysis--areas of growing importance. It is also
suitable as an advanced-level text or reference book for students in
computer science, electrical engineering and mathematics.

-- 
Prof. M. P. Schellekens

Science Foundation Ireland Investigator
Director of Centre for Efficiency-Oriented Languages (CEOL)

National University of Ireland, Cork (UCC)
Department of Computer Science
Center for Efficiency-Oriented Languages (CEOL)
Lancaster Hall
Little Hanover Street 6
Cork, Ireland
WWW: http://www.ceol.ucc.ie/
Tel. + 353 (0)21 490 1917







