Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Vaughan Pratt <pratt@cs.stanford.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Re: Science Citation Index
Date: Tue, 09 Dec 2008 11:35:16 -0800
Lines: 99
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1LAMrh-0000Or-D2@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Vaughan Pratt <pratt@cs.stanford.edu>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241020146 14668 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 15:49:06 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 15:49:06 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: rrosebru@mta.ca Wed Dec 10 07:09:03 2008 -0400
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: categories-list@mta.ca
Delivery-date: Wed, 10 Dec 2008 07:09:03 -0400
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1LAMrh-0000Or-D2
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Wed, 10 Dec 2008 07:04:25 -0400
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
X-Keywords: 
X-UID: 52
Status: O
Content-Length: 5658
Original-Lines: 98
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4746
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4746>

The thing I don't understand about citation indexes is, what is the
barrier to entry here?  For any field naturally associated to a
university department (physics, mathematics, chemistry, history,
English), what is to stop that field deciding that in the interest of
fairness to all professionals working in the field whose work is subject
to review, for example junior faculty, it is going to run its own
citation index subscribing to a set of technical and ethical standards
that it makes public and holds itself to, e.g. via ISO 9000
certification?  It then actively works to promote the use of its index
by reviewing bodies, in competition with the existing citation indexes
run for profit.

Usually reviewers in any given field are reluctant to confess to
depending on citation indexes as a labor saving device.  However when a
field has acknowledged the efficiency of doing so and has set up an
adequately run index serving that need, and a review states that the
only citation index if any resorted to by the reviewer was the field's
own, the credibility of that review is enhanced even though the reviewer
has not stated whether he or she actually used that index.

Reviewers should not be asked to reveal actual use of an index because
that information could prejudice users of the review against reviewees
whose reviewers felt the need to resort to an index, since that could be
taken as a sign of non-notability, of questionable relevance to a
reviewee's performance.  Obviously one wants to hire and retain the most
famous people, but they've all gone to the highest bidder.  More
significantly, fields lose credibility in the eyes of other fields when
they put notability ahead of competence.  Most of all, they lose
effectiveness when they do not give due credit to researchers whose low
profile keeps them below the radar of reviewers yet who are nonetheless
valuable players.  MVP can mean either most valuable player or most
visible player, and these need not always be the same thing in subjects
that don't have 80,000 readers of each and every scientific article.

Because the field's index is working for the benefit of the field more
than for its own profit, it can and should maintain two-way contact with
those working in the field, by encouraging them to contribute suitably
formatted information listing and classifying their identifiable
contributions, as an extension of their CV.  In this way CV's need no
longer be isolated documents but instead become coordinated with the
field's index, whose maintenance becomes the joint responsibility of the
researcher and the index.  This divides the labor that hitherto has had
to be duplicated to a considerable degree at both ends, potentially
halving the cost of this part of the review process.

Done properly, these field indexes will consume resources of course, but
these can be underwritten in the same way that the for-profit indexes
make their money, namely by charging for them at rates competitive with
the established indexes, but with the additional edge of being
supplemented by subsidies from the homes of the appointment and
promotion committees whose work will in consequence be of a higher
quality than it presently is today and who therefore can reasonably make
that case to their provost or HR department.

Many fields already maintain their own indexes, which should in
principle be relatively easy to upgrade to the standards suggested here
compared to having to start from scratch, to the extent that the field
is adequately coordinated with the indexes it considers itself to be
operating.  An index purportedly serving a field that is not responsive
to the field's membership should be disowned by the field and an index
competing with it set up.  Such a threat should motivate any field's
existing indexes that can see which side their bread is buttered on to
play ball.

There is the tricky question of what to do with multiple established
indexes operated independently but at least nominally under a field's
control.  One approach is to select one of them as the one responsible
for the functions proposed here, but if they are complementary then some
sort of coordination between them producing an effect sufficient for
those purposes may be a better solution, as being less disruptive to
their complementarity, whose benefits should be clear to all duality
theorists.

Once a field's index has been accepted by an institution, and becomes
the primary if not only reference for all who need to consult such
indexes, the institution's library need feel under no obligation to
maintain their subscriptions to competing indexes serving that field.
The above-mentioned institutional subsidies can then be drawn at least
in part from those savings, an added efficiency of this system.

Indexes run according to these principles should strongly incentivize
all who stand to benefit from their quality to contribute to that
quality according to their roles.

The extant indexes can complain all they want about uncompetitive
practices, but at bottom they are the ones who brought this unwanted
competition on themselves by operating an inferior product.  Pragmatic
governments do not legislate in competition with Darwin's law of
survival of the fittest because in economics that law trumps all others.
  Governments that legislate at odds with Darwin's law fall victim to
it, as we saw with Russia.  Western civilization has not intentionally
legislated against the interests of fair competition for a long time
now, preferring to legislate against unfair competition by imposing
tariffs (the bludgeon), passing antitrust laws (the rapier), etc.

Vaughan Pratt



