Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Paul Taylor <pt09@PaulTaylor.EU>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: applications of the Yoneda embedding
Date: Sat, 20 Jun 2009 16:45:01 +0100
Lines: 335
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1MIR7p-0006lo-Bo@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Paul Taylor <pt09@PaulTaylor.EU>
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1245608412 8413 80.91.229.12 (21 Jun 2009 18:20:12 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Sun, 21 Jun 2009 18:20:12 +0000 (UTC)
To: Categories list <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: categories@mta.ca Sun Jun 21 20:20:09 2009
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from mailserv.mta.ca ([138.73.1.1])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.50)
	id 1MIReC-0005Xh-IK
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Sun, 21 Jun 2009 20:20:08 +0200
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1MIR7p-0006lo-Bo
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 21 Jun 2009 14:46:41 -0300
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:4996
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/4996>

Having been cast in the role of Brutus -- saving the Republic of
Category Theory from the crowning of a Fundamental Theorem --
I would like to say that it's "Not that I lov'd Caesar less, but
that I lov'd Rome more".

Takuo Matsuoka, whom I thank for the undeserved compliment,
gave an excellent list of some of the applications of the Yoneda
embedding as a way of enriching categories in various mathematical
disciplines.   The first of these was about schemes in Algebraic
Geometry, which he has been explaining to me privately, despite
my long-term mental block on this subject.   Some of the following
was part of my response to him, but I don't want to put him under
pressure to be the spokesman for a subject that, as I discovered
later, is not actually his own.

So, this posting is addressed to algebraic geometers, synthetic
differential geometers, and others, to give a sketch of some of
the categorical techniques that have been developed for general
topology by domain theorists over the past two decades.  Whilst
their subjects manifestly have a richer history than domain theory
did, we now have a few new tricks that they seem to have missed.
However, I shall start with some textbook material.

The Yoneda Lemma is to category theory what Cayley's Theorem
is to groups.   An object of a category can be REPRESENTED by
the collection of all INCOMING morphisms (from all of the other
objects), just as a group can be represented by its permutation
action on itself.  This representation is faithful for the
tremendous but trite reason that an object is represented by
its own identity map.

Here is a syntactic example:  a type X in a lambda calculus is
represented by all of its terms, possibly involving free variables.
One such term is the single variable   x:X,  which is the
identity in the category.   The other objects of the category are
the other types, or, given that there may be many free variables,
the CONTEXTS, which are lists of typed variables.   In proof theory
the letter Gamma is used for a typical context.

This yields a presheaf whose value at Gamma is the set of terms
Gamma |- a:X  of type X, using only the variables from Gamma,
subject to the equivalence defined by the theory.   It defines
a contravariant functor in which the morphisms act by substitution.
This example is spelt out in detail in my book,  "Practical
Foundations of Mathematics", in particular in Section 7.7,
which describes categorical methods for proving normalisation,
conservativity, consistency, etc.

I use the letter Gamma for a typical object of ANY base category
(not just for a syntactic context but also for a topological space
or affine variety) over whose categories we may want to consider
presheaves.  In so far as there was a previous convention, it was
to use "U" (Juergen Koslowski suggested to me that this stood for
"Umgebung" = neighbourhood), "I" (for "index") or "-".

Since a presheaf is a family of SETS subject to some bookkeeping,
the huge advantage of the Yoneda embedding is that we can bring
the power of SET THEORY to bear on categorical problems.   (Rest
assured, you will see that I have not gone over to the Dark Side.)

For example, let f,g:X==>Y be parallel maps in a category C. The
object X is represented by the SETS   C(Gamma,X) of incoming maps,
so we can consider the SUBSET
                                         ---- f ---->
E(Gamma)={x|f.x=g.x}  >--->  C(Gamma, X)             C(Gamma,Y)
                                         ---- g ---->

of maps x:Gamma-->X that have equal composites with f and g.
Notice that these are the data for the universal propery of an
equaliser.  Indeed, the equaliser E>-->X==>Y exists in C iff
the presheaf E(-) is REPRESENTABLE, ie it is of the form C(-,E)
for some object E of C, which is unique up to unique isomorphism.

For this reason I also use the letter Gamma as the test object
FROM which maps come in any universal property.   I would urge
students to work through this method for exponentials too,
first writing down either their universal property or their
introduction and elimination rules.

In topos theory, another interesting presheaf is given by
the set  Sub(Gamma)  of "sieves"  on an object Gamma.   This
presheaf is representable iff the category C is a topos, and
the representing object is the subobject classifier Omega.
I this case, I invite you to work backwards from the definition
of the subobject classifier to find out what a "sieve" is.

In general, the Yoneda embedding preserves universal properties
such as limits that are given by maps FROM a generic object Gamma.

However, it completely DESTROYS the colimits in C, giving it
new ones instead.   Indeed, we can think of a presheaf as a
"formal" colimit diagram.

Now sheaf theory was invented to "PATCH" things together,
that is, to add COLIMITS such as pushouts.   But usually we
don't want to scrap the old colimits altogether, because some
of them were "already correct".  So, we specify which ones we
want to keep, and such a specification is called a GROTHENDIECK
TOPOLOGY.   Then, instead of using ALL presheaves, we just
keep the ones that respect our chosen "correct" colimits,
and call them SHEAVES.

In particular, we are quite often happy with the existing
COPRODUCTS in the base category.  In particular, these will be
stable and disjoint in any topos, but not the same under one
Grothendieck topology as under another, so if the ones that
we have in the original category already have this property
then they are probably correct.   Nowadays, a category with
nice finite coproducts is called EXTENSIVE;  topological spaces,
locales and affine varieties all enjoy this property.

Therefore, the colimits that we want to change are usually the
epis, coequalisers pushouts and filtered (=purely infinite) ones.

Presheaves may be adapted directly to the task of adding colimits
of a particular kind.   For example, Peter Johnstone describes
the "IND" construction that adds filtered colimits in Section VI.1
of "Stone Spaces".  In the dual category, this is how we obtain
profinite objects, which often come with a compact Hausdorff
but totally disconnected topology.

A Grothendieck topos is therefore a truly magnificent beast, but
it is a SET THEORY, whereas sheaves were originally introduced
to  study algebraic topology and algebraic geometry.  I want to
consider some ways in which it might be adapted to the construction
of a category that is actually like whichever subject we wanted
to study.

For various reasons we consider that the category of affine
varieties (the formal opposite of the category of commutative
rings) and the traditional category of topological spaces
are not rich enough for the requirements of their subjects.
For example, they are not cartesian closed.

So we introduce SCHEMES and (for example) EQUILOGICAL SPACES
to do a better job.   (Recall that I don't actually know what
a scheme is, though I have my guesses, and the reason for
spelling out all of this general category theory is to
elicit a definition that I can understand, in return for some
new techniques that algebraic geometers might find useful.)

It is not altogether surprising that the new categories are
represented as subcategories of the category of presheaves on
the old categories.   Since the NEW objects are conceived as
"patched together" from old ones,  they are, by design,
faithfully represented by the incoming maps from (all of)
the OLD objects.

Steve Vickers' posting of 9 June concerned presheaves on the
category of locales.  (Locales have very strong formal analogies
with affine varieties, being the formal opposite of a category
of algebras.)  My posting on the same day about "Aspects of
locale theory" is also relevant to this

Rather more people have studied subcategories of presheaves on
the category of topological spaces.  Pino Rosolini gave an
excellent survey of these categories in his 2000 paper on
"Equilogical spaces and filter spaces".   You can obtain this
and several other papers that provide many of the details of
what I am about to say from his webpage
       www.disi.unige.it/person/RosoliniG/biblio.html

Analogously to the "ind" construction above, Dana Scott's
equilogical spaces formally adjoin quotients of equivalence
relations to topological spaces, whilst Reinhold Heckmann's
construction of "equilocales" does the same for locales.

A Grothendieck topos is a set theory, but what in the construction
makes it so?   It is the requirement on the "correct colimits"
(Grothendieck topology) that they be stable under all PULLBACKS.
The SHEAFIFICATION functor that reflects presheaves to sheaves
also preserves all finite limits.

If we just want a CARTESIAN CLOSED category, rather than a topos,
it is enough that the data and reflection functor be preserved
by PRODUCTS, rather than general pullbacks.   The categories that
I shall describe all contain the base category but are contained
in the smallest category of sheaves, so it becomes irrelevant
whether we consider sheaves as intermediaries or go straight
from presheaves to the smaller category.

Along with several other people in the 1990s, Rosolini and
I studied ways of defining and constructing categories like these,
under the heading of SYNTHETIC DOMAIN THEORY (SDT).  This was
inspired by synthetic differential geometry, and I think Dana
Scott is responsible for the name.  However, most of the other
people who worked under this banner were interested in realisability
toposes rather than sheaf toposes, which was part of the reason
why I changed to a different name.

Key to this is the object SIGMA.  Like Omega, this classifies
subobjects, but now just OPEN ones in topology, or RECURSIVELY
ENUMERABLE ones in computation.  Rosolini identified the
abstract properties of a class of monos (or "dominion") and its
classifier ("dominance") in his PhD thesis.  My "Euclidean
principle",   Fx & x = FT & x,  puts it in an algebraic form --
see "Geometric and Higher Order Logic" on my webpage at
    www.PaulTaylor.EU/ASD/.

However, if algebraic or differential geometers want to pick this
idea up, they should not be misled by the idea of classifying
subobjects of any kind.   It is the algebraic property that
matters.   As a ring,  Sigma should be the ring of polynomials
in one variable.   As an affine variety, it is the geometric
incarnation of the ground field.

This means that, for an affine variety X, the set of maps X->Sigma
is (the underlying set of) the corresponding ring.  Similarly,
in topology it is the set of open subsets, ie the corresponding
frame.   The idea of ASD is that this "set" of maps should itself
be a space, but I don't know what this is for algebraic varieties.

Sigma is the spider at the centre of the web.  Considered as
a space, it carries the relevant algebraic structure (a lattice
or a ring), and maps  X-->Sigma  determine the structure of
other spaces X.   (Notice that this is the opposite way from
the maps Gamma-->X that motivated the category of presheaves.)

In synthetic domain theory we devised various properties, involving
maps X-->Sigma, that would say whether the presheaf X was to be
regarded as a "domain".   I am going to stick to those that can
be expressed in pure category theory and generalised to other
subjects.

The weakest one, a kind of T0 property, was that   X >---> Sigma^Y,
ie that the presheaf X be a subobject (family of subsets) of some
exponential.  (Recall that you constructed exponential presheaves
as an exercise earlier!)

A stronger one is that  X >---> Sigma^Y ====> Sigma^Z  as an
equaliser of such exponentials.

Usually there is a reflection functor from all presheaves to the
"domains", and this preserves products.

I forget exactly what was in each of Rosolini's papers, but
he studied the analogy between this reflection functor and
sheafification,  and also what happens in presheaf categories
over various interesting concrete categories.

Even with this modification of the notion of sheaf topos, the
Yoneda embedding and Grothendieck toposes have at best been
given the status of a "constitutional monarchy", so it is time
to introduce some genuinely republican ideas.

My programme "Abstract Stone Duality" moves away from the models
based on toposes to a direct axiomatisation of the subject that
we actually want to study.  This axiomatisation consists of two
parts -- some pure category theory and some specifically topological
axioms on top of it.   The reason why I believe ASD could be
adapted to other subjects is that the topological axioms say
little more than that Sigma is a lattice, so this could be replaced
by a ring.   MOST of the work is done by the underlying category
theory, and this will be even more strongly so in the developments
of the theory that I am currenly studying.

In ASD, I concentrate on powers of Sigma, rather than of general
objects, and other structure that can be defined in these terms.
The version of my theory that is reasonably well established
starts from the hypothesis that the adjunction Sigma^(-) -| Sigma^(-)
be MONADIC.

The result of this is an account of computably based locally
compact spaces and computable continuous functions.

I applied this to elementary real analysis, and obtained a computable
construction of the Dedekind reals in which [0,1] is compact ---
contrary to the received wisdom of Russian Recursive Analysis that
this is impossible, and to Bishop's constructive analysis, which
develops a lot of the subject in a "can do" fashion but without
using compactness of [0,1].

The problem with this theory is that, rather than enlarging the
traditional category to a cartesian closed one that is embedded in
a category of presheaves, it cuts down to locally compact spaces.

However, I am currently writing up a new technique that replaces
the monadic assumption.  In one manifestation,  it gives an account
of all sober topological spaces and continuous functions.  However,
since it says that products preserve epis,  it doesn't work for
locales, because of the counterexample that I gave in my "aspects
of locale theory" posting.

On the other hand, this DOES work for affine varieties -- over a
field, because the same problem with locales arises if you try to
work over a general commutative ring.   (It comes down to whether
modules are FLAT,  ie tensor product with them preserves monos.)

I talked about "illegitimate" presheaves in my "categories"
posting on "aspects of locale theory", and Steve Vickers said
something on the same topic.   Set-theoretic issues aside,
presheaves are "heavyweight" gadgets in that you have to give
data pertaining to every object of the base category, so a
scheme is defined by its relationship to ALL rings.

I am offering a much more "lightweight" construction.  In this,
to give an object of the new category (a "scheme", maybe) would
involve only a handful of objects and morphisms of the original
one (rings).

This "lightweight" construction will give an account of equilogical
spaces (with some of their more set-theoretic features removed).
I would like to know what the relationship is between the analogous
result that I have for algebraic varieties, and whatever the official
definition of SCHEME is in algebraic geometry.

My category of "schemes" (if that is what it is) would be embedded
in the presheaf category and closed therein under finite limits
and exponentials.   It would contain all affine varieties, along
with their products, equalisers, pullbacks, coproducts and epis
but not coequalisers (coproducts, coequalisers, pushouts, products
and monos but not equalisers of rings).

The (possible) difference from the existing notion of scheme is
that I would give you the SMALLEST category of presheaves that
has these properties.

Along with this would come a "synthetic" and computable
axiomatisation similar to the one that I give for elementary
real analysis in
      www.paultaylor.eu/ASD/lamcra/elemcalc

Finally, why is the Yoneda Lemma not a Theorem?   Because Lemmas
do the work in mathematics, whilst Theorems, like royalty,
just take the credit.

Thank you for listening.

Paul Taylor
www.PaulTaylor.EU



[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

