Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: categories <cat-dist@mta.ca>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Abelian-topos (AT) categories
Date: Sun, 2 Nov 1997 14:53:51 -0400 (AST)
Lines: 115
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <Pine.OSF.3.90.971102145324.32294A-100000@mailserv.mta.ca>
NNTP-Posting-Host: main.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1241017006 26049 80.91.229.2 (29 Apr 2009 14:56:46 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Apr 2009 14:56:46 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: cat-dist Sun Nov  2 14:54:49 1997
Original-Received: by mailserv.mta.ca; id AA05915; Sun, 2 Nov 1997 14:53:52 -0400
Status: RO
Content-Length: 6379
Original-Lines: 114
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:507
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/507>

Date: Sun, 02 Nov 1997 06:52:02 -0800
From: Vaughan R. Pratt <pratt@cs.stanford.edu>


Surely a natural name for these "abelian-topos" categories would be
abelian-topos categories, AT categories for short.  (I barely grasp
them, I only found out what abelian categories were a week ago, when
someone on sci.math asked about them and I looked them up and answered
him because I wanted to know too.  It struck me as interesting that
they had so much in common with toposes, whence my question about
intersecting their respective theories.  I made language a parameter
because it seemed intuitively obvious that a strong enough language
would make the models of that intersection the union of the respective
classes.  But as Peter points out this is already a triviality for any
theory closed under classical disjunction, which I still can't believe
I didn't know.)

On the question of the right language for defining AT, I fully agree
with Peter that universal Horn sentences are the appropriate logical
strength of language.  (I take back what I said before about
"universal" not making a difference.  Peter showed that for the Horn
theory, i.e. allowing existential quantification, the models are
representable as products AxT of an abelian category A with a pretopos
T.  Presumably the weaker universal Horn theory admits in addition the
appropriate subcategories thereof.)  So would it be correct to say that
this makes AT a quasivariety in CAT with functors preserving the
signature Peter is using?

What I'm less clear about than the logical strength is the choice of
signature.  In particular what about the closed structure?

Without the closed structure we have Peter's AxT representation
theorem, with the theory finitely axiomatized to boot.  Presumably this
remains unchanged by the introduction of closed structure: we retain
only those categories AxT such that A and T independently admit closed
structure, and can finitely axiomatize the separate closed structure of
each in terms of the associated retractions A and T (ugh, overloading),
thereby axiomatizing the joint closed structure.

For example the tensor unit I of AxT will be (Z,1) (Z the tensor unit
of A), with AI = (Z,0) != I (except for pure abelian categories) and TI
= (0,1) = 1 != I (except for pure pretoposes).  But for objects a,b of
A and t,u of T, the tensor product (a,t)@(b,u) will be (a@b,txu), with
A(a@b,txu) = (a@b,0) = (a,0)@(b,0) = A(a,t)@A(b,u) and T(a@b,txu) =
(0,txu) = (0,t)@(0,u) = T(a,t)@T(b,u).  (So the retractions preserve
tensor product but not tensor unit---TI just gives the terminator, but
AI furnishes a new constant.)

So should there perhaps be two classes, the AT categories and the
closed AT categories?  The latter would add I and @ to the signature
(and presumably \aleph\lambda\rho, bless them).

For the closed AT categories, TX can be neatly defined as 1@X, with the
T-type objects identified as those having only one map to I (Mike Barr
pointed out to me that strictness of 0, maps to 0 only from initial
objects, would do this job), and with a topos defined as a closed AT
category for which I is terminal (or 0 is strict).

But although people seem comfortable working with toposes as opposed to
pretoposes, what about abelian closed categories (if that's the right
word order)?  Despite Ab itself being a closed category, I don't see
much discussion of closed structure for abelian categories.  Why is
this?  Am I just reading the wrong stuff, or is the closed structure of
abelian categories boring, or what?  Or is FinAb (abelian but not
abelian closed---no suitable tensor unit) too desirable to discard in
this way?  (What comparably interesting pretoposes are so lost?  Not
the topos FinSet.)  Does the requirement of being closed kill off too
many desirable abelian categories?  I would have thought lack of closed
structure would greatly impair the utility of a category, however
beautiful its objects might be.

I'm interested in these classes, especially those whose categories
admit closed structure, because toposes sit at or near the left
(geometric or discrete) end of what I've been calling the Stone gamut,
while abelian categories sit near the middle.  AT categories offer an
entirely different approach to the Chu construction for mixing
categories from strategic positions on the Stone gamut.  The Chu
construction Chu(V,k) mixes two closed categories, V and V\op,
symmetrically positioned about the center of the Stone gamut, to yield
all categories "in between" V and V\op (and "all"--certainly all
small--categories period when V and V\op are at the outermost points,
viz. Set and Set\op).  In contrast AT categories mix categories from
the far left (represented by Set) and the center (represented by Ab) to
get a qualitatively different effect that I'm not sure how to relate to
the Chu construction but which seems in some vague sense dual to it.

One such sense is as follows.  AT is the quasivariety generated just by
Set and Ab alone.  So in this sense at least it is the smallest
quasivariety spanning the left half of the Stone gamut, assuming that
the quasivariety generated by either Set or Ab alone does not span the
gamut but crowds around their two respective positions on the gamut,
left and middle.  Include the duals of AT categories (not necessarily
expanded to a quasivariety, see below) and now you cover the whole
gamut in this minimal sense.  On the other hand the various
comprehensiveness properties I've been pointing out for the concrete
subcategories of Chu(Set,K) for large enough K (including all small
categories, even when concreteness is a requirement unlike the
comprehensiveness results of the 1960's) make "sub-Chu" maximal over
the Stone gamut.

Vague question.  The minimality of AT and the maximality of Chu is a
very weak sort of duality, analogous to the minimal structure of sets
vs. the maximal structure of Boolean algebras.  Is there a more formal
duality here, analogous to the duality of Set and CABA?  That the
retracts AX and TX seem to be dual notions, being respectively
coreflective and reflective, gives them some of the flavor of Chu.  But
is AT itself dual to Chu in any categorical sense?

More precise question.  Is the quasivariety generated by all three of
Set, Ab, and Set\op (aka CABA) finitely axiomatizable?  And if not,
does using Bool instead of CABA help or hinder?

Vaughan


