Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Vaughan Pratt <pratt@cs.stanford.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: re: A well kept secret
Date: Sat, 12 Dec 2009 23:01:20 -0800
Lines: 123
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1NJxLE-0004oz-1K@mailserv.mta.ca>
References: <E1NF60Z-0006Ay-2g@mailserv.mta.ca> <E1NFyeE-0005sO-Nx@mailserv.mta.ca> <E1NJEre-0002dm-UC@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Vaughan Pratt <pratt@cs.stanford.edu>
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1260746806 8634 80.91.229.12 (13 Dec 2009 23:26:46 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Sun, 13 Dec 2009 23:26:46 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories list <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: categories@mta.ca Mon Dec 14 00:26:38 2009
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from mailserv.mta.ca ([138.73.1.1])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.50)
	id 1NJxpj-00065T-Oy
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Mon, 14 Dec 2009 00:26:36 +0100
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1NJxLE-0004oz-1K
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 13 Dec 2009 18:55:04 -0400
In-Reply-To: <E1NJEre-0002dm-UC@mailserv.mta.ca>
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:5364
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/5364>

Michael Barr wrote:
>  First, I was around all through the 70s (and most
> of the 60s) and I have no idea what categorists did to earn the opprobrium
> described below.

My experience with CT may give some insight here.

When I joined the MIT faculty in 1972 it was already 8 years since I'd
taken Max Kelly's category theory class, and the only bit of it that I
had retained by that time was that categories weren't required to have
an underlying set functor (and I couldn't in 1972 even phrase that much
of my recollection in the language of CT I used just now).

Now skip the next two paragraphs (which are only there to preserve
chronological order) unless you want all the boring details.

In between I spent a year taking mathematics honours (fourth year), in
which Max taught us topology (he had planned to teach us algebraic
topology but realized we weren't prepared for it) and we got many other
courses from John Mack (number theory), T.G. Room (axiomatic geometry),
Bruce Barnes (group theory), etc.  I then spent a year doing physics
honours (a second fourth year, I did maths honours first because I
wanted to be a theoretical physicist and had sensed that without maths
honours the physics honours year would be insufficient grounding for a
theoretical physicist).

But then the next year I noticed that computer science was an
as-yet-untapped gold mine of important yet easily solved problems,
whence my career move from physics into CS.  (A pity in some respects
since I've always been good at solving hard problems once they engage my
interest and the problems in physics had by then become quite hard and
therefore should have been right up my alley.)  So I became a CS grad
student at Sydney then Berkeley then Stanford, and then Don Knuth's
postdoc in 1971-72, and then spent a few months at IBM Yorktown Heights
in a visiting faculty position in 1972.

In 1972 the only person in the whole of 545 Technology Square (a 9-story
building on the "other side of the tracks" from the main body of MIT)
who talked about categories was Mitch Wand.  Mike Fischer was his
advisor.  I lived out Mike's way and commuted to work with him much of
the time, a half hour ride each way, so we got to discuss many things,
but I don't recall category theory ever coming up.  We mostly talked
about algorithms and program verification and programming language
design and group theory and other technical things, along with the
vegetable gardens we were growing in our back yards as a joint project
that also involved Albert Meyer.  We both were totally oblivious to
politics, which never came up.  And it never occurred to either of us
that we should discuss CT.

While still a grad student Mitch gave a graduate course on CT.  I didn't
attend any of it, being rather busy as a junior faculty and having no
occasion to, but I would occasionally hear feedback from those who did.
  The general feeling seemed to be that this was "mathematics made
difficult," a way of obfuscating the obvious.  I had no reason to defend
CT at the time and simply accepted these reports as putting CT in the
same ballpark that Rene Thom's chaos theory was later put by some of its
detractors.

In 1979, finding logic problems becoming more challenging, I
(re)discovered algebra by way of universal algebra.  I learned UA from
Rasiowa and Sikorski, which I found to my surprise I could speed-read
(must have been the excellent Sydney algebra courses), and successfully
applied it to the logic problem I'd previously been stuck on.

In 1983 I realized that category theory was the algebra of functions.  I
tried very very hard to understand Chapter 1 of CWM, which seemed far
more obscure than universal algebra.  Speed-reading that chapter was out
of the question for me.

Eventually I gave up and moved on to Chapter 2 and beyond, and after
that it was just as easy as universal algebra.

----------
So I would say that the opprobrium could well have originated from the
impression that CT was obfuscation, which Chapter 1 of CWM did nothing
to dispel.  Two four-syllable words beginning with the same letter, one
leading to the other.
----------

So what do I think today?  Well, I would rank three related concepts as
being of fundamental but not equal importance, in the following order,
most important first.

1.  2-categories

2.  Dense functors

3.  Natural transformations

The algebra of 2-categories is barely algebra, it is really the
associativity intrinsic to geometry.  If you cut a string, even one with
colored ink marks on it, in two places you can't tell after the fact in
which order the cuts were made.  If you cut a painting by Picasso
vertically then horizontally into four pieces, the same holds even
though the painting has depreciated.  These are respectively
associativity and middle-interchange.  I hardly recognize these as
algebra, they're geometry as far as I'm concerned, but they're the
algebra of 2-categories.  They suck, e pur si muove.

Dense functors are important because they expose what is "natural" about
natural transformations as an instance of 2-cells.  To see how this
works see http://boole.stanford.edu/pub/yon.pdf , "The Yoneda lemma as a
foundational tool for algebra."  I imagine Steve Lack et al have some
equivalent way of describing this viewpoint which I'm still waiting to
hear about (my 1962-1965 classmate Ross Street promised he'd get back to
me on this but that was a while back).  Meanwhile I've received
enthusiastic feedback about it from Ronnie Brown and also a response
from William Boshuk ("very enjoyable pamphlet"), though that's it so far.

I've felt for at least 15 years that the notion of natural
transformation as traditionally defined is a complicated concept.  This
I believe whether one thinks of them as a category theorist or (in their
manifestation as homomorphisms) as an algebraist.  Either way the idea
is subtle.  This subtlety of the concept is why I don't rank it higher.

My ranking makes it ironic that transformations that are called
"natural" should end up third.  But then that's just my ranking, YMMV as
they say.

Vaughan

[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

