Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: pare@mathstat.dal.ca (Robert Pare)
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Small is beautiful
Date: Fri, 1 Jan 2010 10:48:26 -0400 (AST)
Lines: 59
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1NQnf2-0007V3-Rg@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: pare@mathstat.dal.ca (Robert Pare)
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1262377722 26442 80.91.229.12 (1 Jan 2010 20:28:42 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Fri, 1 Jan 2010 20:28:42 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: categories@mta.ca Fri Jan 01 21:28:34 2010
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from mailserv.mta.ca ([138.73.1.1])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.50)
	id 1NQo6q-0006m2-4j
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Fri, 01 Jan 2010 21:28:32 +0100
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1NQnf2-0007V3-Rg
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Fri, 01 Jan 2010 15:59:48 -0400
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:5451
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/5451>


I would like to add a few thoughts to the "evil" discussion.

My 30+ years involvement with indexed categories have led me
to the following understanding. There are two kinds of categories,
small and large (surprise!). But the difference is not mainly one
of size. Rather it's how well we can pin down the objects. The
distinction between sets and classes is often thought of in terms
of size but Russell's problem with the set of all sets was not one of
size but rather of the nature of sets. Once you think you have the set
of all sets, you can construct another set which you had missed.
I.e. the notion is changing, slippery. There are set theories where
you can have a subclass of a set which is not a set (c.f. Vopenka, e.g.)
Smallness is more a question of representability: a functor may fail to
be representable because it's too big (no solution set) or, more often,
because it's badly behaved (doesn't preserve products, say). Subfunctors
of representables are not usually representable.

In our work on indexed categories, Schumacher and I had tried to treat
this question by considering categories equipped with a groupoid of
isomorphisms, which we called *canonical*, and then consider functors
defined up to canonical isomorphism. In small categories only identities
were canonical whereas in large categories, all isomorphisms were canonical.
Our ideas were a bit naive and not well developed and earned us some ridicule,
so we quietly stopped talking about it. Recently, Makkai developed
an extensive theory of functors defined up to isomorphisms, FOLDS, but
did not consider the possibility of specifying which isomorphisms ahead
of time, so small categories were not included.

When I used to teach category theory, before Dalhousie made me chuck my
chalk chuck, I would tell students there were two kinds of categories in
practice. Large ones which are categories of structures, corresponding to
various branches of mathematics we wished to study. These categories
supported various universal constructions, all defined up to isomorphism.
Two large categories are considered to be the same if they are equivalent.
It was considered impolite to ask if two objects were equal. Then
there are the small categories which are used to study the large ones.
These are syntactic in nature. For these, one can't expect the kinds of
universal constructions that large categories have, but now it's okay,
even necessary, to consider equality between objects. I went on to say
that there were then four kinds of functors. Functors between large categories
were to be thought of as constructions of one structure from another, e.g.
the group ring. Functors between small categories were interpretations of
one theory in another or reindexing or rearranging. Functors from small
to large categories were models or diagrams in the large one. These kinds
of functors are perhaps the most important of the four, although this may
be debatable. The fourth kind, from large to small are rarer. They can
be thought of as gradings or partitions of the large category.

Well, after these ramblings, perhaps my message is lost. So here it is:
Small categories -> equality of objects okay
Large categories -> equality of objects not okay
Small is beautiful, not evil.

Bob


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

