Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: selinger@mathstat.dal.ca (Peter Selinger)
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: the definition of "evil"
Date: Sun, 3 Jan 2010 03:23:08 -0400 (AST)
Lines: 184
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1NRRk6-0000Cr-SG@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: selinger@mathstat.dal.ca (Peter Selinger)
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1262531167 11483 80.91.229.12 (3 Jan 2010 15:06:07 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Sun, 3 Jan 2010 15:06:07 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca (Categories List)
Original-X-From: categories@mta.ca Sun Jan 03 16:05:59 2010
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from mailserv.mta.ca ([138.73.1.1])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.50)
	id 1NRS1l-0000jk-Bu
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Sun, 03 Jan 2010 16:05:57 +0100
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1NRRk6-0000Cr-SG
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Sun, 03 Jan 2010 10:47:42 -0400
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:5459
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/5459>

Dear all,

sorry for sending yet another message on the topic of "evil"
structures on categories. After some interesting private replies, as
well as Dusko's latest message (which should have appeared on the list
by the time you read this), I noticed that not everyone is agreeing on
the technical meaning of the term "evil". I will therefore attempt to
state a more precise technical definition of the term as I have used
it. Perhaps 2-category theorists already have another name for this.

The information definition I had used is that a structure is "evil" if
it does not "transport along equivalences of categories". I thought it
was reasonably obvious what was meant by "transport along", but there
is actually a lot of variation in what people understand this phrase
to mean.

John Baez gave a pointer to a website containing a technical
definition of "evil": http://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/evil.
Unfortunately, this site only speaks of properties, not structures. It
is easy to state what it means for a property of categories to be
transported along equivalences: namely, if C has the property, and C
and C' are equivalent, then C' has the property. Structures are more
tricky.

Certainly, it should not just mean that if C admits such a structure,
and C' is a category equivalent to C, then C' admits such a structure.
(Then "admitting a structure" would merely be a property).  This seems
to be the definition Dusko has used. If we used this definition, there
would be almost no evil structures; in particular, the original
(strict) notion of dagger category is not evil in this sense.  Dagger
structure is reflected by full and faithful functors, and therefore by
one half of an equivalence. The point is that the other half won't
respect it.

At least to me, "transported" suggests that the given equivalence
respects the structure in some sense. So here is my attempt at a
definition.

 DEFINITION. Let X be some structure on categories. By this, I mean
 that there is a given 2-category called X-Cat, whose objects are
 called X-categories, whose morphisms are called X-functors, and whose
 2-cells are called X-transformations, and for which there is a given
 2-functor U to Cat, called the forgetful functor.

 We say that X is "transported along equivalences of categories" if the
 following holds. Given an X-category D', with underlying category D =
 U(D'), and a category C, and an equivalence (F,G,e,h) of categories D
 and C, where F: D -> C, G: C -> D, and e: FG -> id_C, h: GF -> id_D,
 it is then possible to find:

 (1) an X-category C' whose underlying category U(C') is isomorphic
     [not equivalent!] to C. Let c : U(C') -> C be the isomorphism
     (i.e., an invertible functor in Cat) with inverse c': C -> U(C');

 (2) an X-equivalence of X-categories (F',G',e',h'), where
     F': D' -> C', G': C' -> D', e': F'G' -> id_C', and h': G'F' -> id_D'
     [the concept of equivalence makes sense in any 2-category];

 such that

 (3) (U(F'), U(G'), U(e'), U(h')) = (cF, Gc', cec', h).

 Here, cF and Gc' denotes composition of functors, and cec' denotes
 whiskering.

 The structure X is called "evil" iff it is not transported along
 equivalences of categories.

 This finishes the definition.

More informally, "transported along equivalences" therefore means that
if D and C are equivalent, and D has an X-structure, then there is a
way to equip C with an X-structure and to lift the original equivalence
to an X-equivalence.

There was a need for the isomorphism c in the definition, because the
forgetful functor U : X-Cat -> Cat may not be strictly speaking
surjective onto 0-cells in some real-life examples (and in any case,
this forgetful functor may sometimes only be well-defined up to
isomorphism). It is important that c is an isomorphism, rather than an
equivalence, because else the definition becomes vacuous (and we are
precisely interested in notions that are not well-defined up to
equivalence).

Also note that I didn't require the data (C',F',G',e',h') to be
unique, not even up to equivalence in X-Cat. Although in practice, it
will often be unique in this sense. So my definition allows for a
given structure to be transported "in essentially more than one way"
along a given equivalence. I am open to strengthening the definition
to forbid this.

It is clear that the definition generalizes to any 2-category instead
of Cat, so one might for example speak of structures on monoidal
categories, or on categories-with-a-distinguished-subcategory, or even
on dagger categories, as being evil or not.

Here are some examples of structures:

* monoidal structure on categories is non-evil (for concreteness,
  taken with strong monoidal functors and monoidal natural
  transformations).

* strict monoidal structure is evil, when taken with strict monoidal
  functors. With strong monoidal functors, I think it is still evil,
  but I am not sure at this late hour.

* dagger structure is evil. More generally, any structure X with which
  one can equip FHilb (the category of finite dimensional Hilbert
  spaces), and which allows a definition of unitary map that includes
  all identities and that coincides with the usual one on FHilb, and
  for which the full and faithful X-functors preserve and reflect
  unitary maps, is evil. Here is the technical argument again, as it
  seems to have been misunderstood. The forgetful functor
  F : FHilb -> FVect induces an equivalence, whose other half
  G : FVect -> FHilb requires a choice of inner product on each finite
  dimensional vector space. Define such a G in some way. Fix some
  X-structure on FVect. Let V be some non-trivial vector space, and
  let i and j be two different inner products on V. Then (V,i) and
  (V,j) are Hilbert spaces, so different objects of FHilb.  Consider
  the morphism (in FHilb) f:(V,i) -> (V,j) given by f(v) = v. It is
  evidently not unitary. However, we have F(f) = id_V: V -> V, which
  is unitary, no matter the X structure that was chosen on FVect.
  So F does not reflect unitary maps. QED.

  Note that it is F, not G, that is causing problems. As remarked
  above, since G is full and faithful, it is possible to successfully
  reflect the dagger structure along G to FVect. This amounts to
  arbitrarily choosing some inner product on each vector space. But it
  won't be compatible with F.

  Also note that this argument is independent of the definition of the
  2-cells of X-Cat. So it is even valid for some weaker definitions of
  "evil", for example, if one only requires F and G to lift to
  X-functors, rather than to an X-equivalence.

  I will argue that any structure X that claims to be a "weak" version
  of dagger structure should at least satisfy the conditions I listed
  as preconditions for the argument above. This is the basis for my
  claim that no construction such as Toby's or Dusko's can succeed in
  producing a non-evil equivalent of dagger structure.

* the structure of "being equipped with a chosen Frobenius structure
  on each object" is evil, relative to monoidal categories.

* the structure of "being equipped with an identity-on-objects
  covariant functor" is evil.

* more generally, the structure of "being equipped with a chosen
  subcategory" is evil, unless the subcategory is required, as part of
  the structure, to contain all isomorphisms (in which case it is not
  evil).

* poset-enrichment (with composition f o g monotone in f and g) is
  non-evil.

* The following structure is evil: equip a category with a partial
  order on each hom-set, so that composition f o g is monotone in g,
  but not necessarily in f. Proof: Given such a structure on any
  category, define g:A->B to be "monotone" if (X,g) : (X,A) -> (X,B)
  is monotone for all X.  Consider the category whose objects are
  partially-ordered sets, and whose morphisms are *all* functions
  (thanks to Fred Linton for this example). It can be equipped with
  the aforementioned structure, by giving the pointwise ordering to
  the functions in each hom-set.  As a category, it is equivalent to
  Set. The rest of the argument proceeds as above for Hilbert spaces,
  with "monotone" instead of "unitary": take some non-trivial set with
  two different partial orders, then the identity is non-monotone,
  etc.

The last example is almost an enrichment in Poset, but instead of the
usual cartesian product on Poset, we have used another bifunctor on
Poset, given by cartesian product P x Q of the underlying sets, with
the non-standard order defined by (p,q) <= (p',q') iff p=p' and
q<=q'. This operation is bifunctorial and associative, but not quite
monoidal, because it lacks a right unit. More generally, taking
"enrichments" in such almost-monoidal categories often yields evil
structures. An analogous example works for the category of finite
abelian groups and all set-theoretic functions.

Happy new year to all, -- Peter


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

