Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Mamuka Jibladze <jib@rmi.ge>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Dito Pataraia
Date: Fri, 23 Dec 2011 04:44:38 +0400
Lines: 107
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1RdrbG-0000Xc-82@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Mamuka Jibladze <jib@rmi.ge>
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: dough.gmane.org 1324594847 1213 80.91.229.12 (22 Dec 2011 23:00:47 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@dough.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Thu, 22 Dec 2011 23:00:47 +0000 (UTC)
To: <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Fri Dec 23 00:00:42 2011
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtpx.mta.ca ([138.73.1.4])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.69)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1Rdrcv-0002R3-J2
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Fri, 23 Dec 2011 00:00:41 +0100
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:47095)
	by smtpx.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.77)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1RdrbF-0006jS-77; Thu, 22 Dec 2011 18:58:57 -0400
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1RdrbG-0000Xc-82
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Thu, 22 Dec 2011 18:58:58 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:7127
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/7127>



Dear colleagues,

It is with great sadness that we announce the
passing of Dito Pataraia on December 15, 2011. He was 48. Dito was an
indispensable source of inspiration. At seminars he generously shared
his uniquely original insights on several important topics in category
theory, mathematical logic and algebraic topology, but he was reluctant
to publish or pursue a scientific degree. His major achievements remain
unpublished and unknown to the general mathematical community. However,
his brilliant ability to effortlessly present complex and deep
mathematical insights with incredible simplicity and clarity would leave
an unforgettable impression on those few who were lucky enough to hear
him talk during a seminar. At the same time, Dito's infinite kindness,
unfailing humor and sharp, but open and unassuming mind made him the
heart of a company, a kind of person that makes one better by simply
being around. It is an inconsolable grief that he is no longer with us.
It has been a privilege to know him. The brilliant sparkle he managed to
light up in our hearts will be cherished forever.

The following is a
characteristic illustration of his style - one of the very few things
that he decided to make publicly available:


http://www.emis.de/journals/GMJ/vol4/v4n6-4.pdf [1]

There are (maybe
too) many approaches to the universal characterization of the
fundamental group, in various flavors and degrees of generality. Dito's
version is not just another one. It is totally unexpected, completely
against the mainstream thought on this topic, and yet ever so natural.
Quite probably it opens up a new and absolutely unexplored field of
study.

Most of Dito's work was only known in fragments to his close
friends from many long discussions. Once Mamuka Jibladze returned from
one of the PSSLs, where he learned about two interesting open questions.
One was whether the Witt fixed point theorem for dcpo's is
constructively valid; the second - the question of Andy Pitts - whether
any Heyting algebra can occur as the poset of all subobjects of some
object in an elementary topos. After three days Dito came to the seminar
with positive answers to both of these questions. He never published
these results. The proof of the first question is relatively simple, so
his talk at another PSSL (in Aarhus) was sufficient for others to
reconstruct and reproduce it in the literature (you have probably seen
in a paper, book or online the combination Bourbaki-Witt-Pataraia). The
proof of the second question is much more complicated. Dito's proof
consisted of two parts - the construction, from a Heyting algebra, of
some intermediate structure which he called Higher Order Cylindric
Heyting Algebra (hocha for short), and then the construction of a topos
from any hocha. This second part was more or less similar to several
known constructions (a hocha is sort of a (powerset, product) reduct of
a topos, so an equalizer completion of a hocha is a topos). That part
was more transparent and even partly written down. In fact, after Dito
and Mamuka described it to Peter Johnstone, Martin Hyland, and Andy
Pitts among others at Cambridge, Peter came up with yet another
transparent and elegant construction of this second part based on
allegories. However the first part - constructing a hocha from a Heyting
algebra - is much more involved. It seems to force one into a completely
unexplored territory. The proof that Dito had was stuffed with
completely unexpected new ideas and constructions. As Marek Zawadowski
put it after listening to Dito in Tbilisi, it was like witnessing a
magician pulling rabbit after rabbit out of his hat. However the proof,
if written down, would be about forty pages long and did not satisfy
Dito at all. The proof that Dito had was truly stuffed with completely
unexpected new ideas and constructions - as Marek Zawadowski put it
after listening to Dito in Tbilisi, it was like witnessing a magician
pulling rabbit after rabbit from a top hat. However the proof, if
written down, would be about forty pages long and did not satisfy Dito
at all. He spent a week in Utrecht, where Jaap van Oosten kindly
followed the exposition every day, and came up with an extremely
important simplification (Jaap discovered that the substitution
operators may be expressed from the rest of the hocha structure). Still
the proof remained too involved for Dito's taste, and he kept returning
to it. As we mentioned, he never cared about publishing anything, his
only priority was to make things as clear as possible. So Dito just took
his time, having occasional opportunities to discuss it with Marek
Zawadowski, Silvio Ghilardi and others. Just about a month before his
death, some new idea occurred to him, which would help to organize the
proof into something much more manageable. Unfortunately, there was not
enough time for Dito to write it down in detail, but luckily he did
share his new idea at the seminar.

Dito worked on many other exciting
questions in several fields, ranging from philosophy to arithmetic. Some
of you might be aware of Dito's several unpublished works - an
analysis-free proof of total disconnectedness of compact Hausdorff
Boolean algebras, a description of the PROP of Hopf algebras, and a
completely novel approach to Hopf-algebraic knot invariants. It is now
our duty to make as much of his work available to the general
mathematical community as possible.

Dito's Georgian friends and
colleagues.



Links:
------
[1]
http://www.emis.de/journals/GMJ/vol4/v4n6-4.pdf


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

