Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Andrzej Murawski <andrzej.murawski@leicester.ac.uk>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: LICS 2013 - Call for Papers
Date: Mon, 17 Sep 2012 10:10:15 +0100
Lines: 177
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1TDfrH-0003Ao-JX@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Andrzej Murawski <andrzej.murawski@leicester.ac.uk>
NNTP-Posting-Host: plane.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=windows-1252
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1347905834 26557 80.91.229.3 (17 Sep 2012 18:17:14 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Mon, 17 Sep 2012 18:17:14 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca,
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Mon Sep 17 20:17:17 2012
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtpx.mta.ca ([138.73.1.134])
	by plane.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.69)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1TDfsd-000831-3j
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Mon, 17 Sep 2012 20:17:11 +0200
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:42452)
	by smtpx.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.77)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1TDfqf-0003NQ-Rs; Mon, 17 Sep 2012 15:15:09 -0300
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1TDfrH-0003Ao-JX
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Mon, 17 Sep 2012 15:15:47 -0300
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:7448
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/7448>

                                  CALL FOR PAPERS

              Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
                LOGIC IN COMPUTER SCIENCE (LICS 2013)

                     June 25-28, 2013, New Orleans, USA
               http://www2.informatik.hu-berlin.de/lics/lics13/


LICS 2013 will be hosted by Tulane University, in New Orleans, LA USA,
from June 25th to 28th, 2013. LICS 2013 will be co-located with MFPS13
(23-25 June) and CSF13 (28-30 June).

The LICS Symposium is an annual international forum on theoretical and
practical topics in computer science that relate to logic, broadly construe=
d.
We invite submissions on topics that fit under that rubric. Suggested, but
not exclusive, topics of interest include: automata theory, automated
deduction, categorical models and logics, concurrency and distributed
computation, constraint programming, constructive mathematics, database
theory, decision procedures, description logics, domain theory, finite mode=
l
theory, theory of automatic structures, formal aspects of program analysis,
formal methods, foundations of computability, higher-order logic, lambda
and combinatory calculi, linear logic, logic in artificial intelligence, lo=
gic
programming, logical aspects of bioinformatics, logical aspects of
computational complexity, logical aspects of quantum computation,
logical frameworks, logics of programs, modal and temporal logics,
model checking, probabilistic systems, process calculi, programming
language semantics, proof theory, real-time systems, reasoning about
security, rewriting, type systems and type theory, and verification.


Important Dates:
Authors are required to submit a paper title and a short abstract of about
100 words in advance of submitting the extended abstract of the paper.

Titles & Short Abstracts Due      :   January 7, 2013
Extended Abstracts Due            :   January 14, 2013
Author Notification (approximate) :   March 22, 2013
Final Versions Due for Proceedings:   April 26, 2013

Deadlines are firm; late submissions will not be considered. All submission=
s
will be electronic via http://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=3Dlics2013.


Submission Instructions:
Every extended abstract must be submitted in the IEEE Proceedings 2-column
10pt format and may not be longer than 10 pages, including references.
LaTeX style files will be available on the conference website. The extended
abstract must be in English and provide sufficient detail to allow the
program committee to assess the merits of the paper. It should begin with
a succinct statement of the issues, a summary of the main results, and
a brief explanation of their significance and relevance to the conference
and to computer science, all phrased for the non-specialist. Technical
development directed to the specialist should follow. References and
comparisons with related work must be included. (If necessary, detailed
proofs of technical results may be included in a clearly-labeled appendix,
to be consulted at the discretion of program committee members.) Extended
abstracts not conforming to the above requirements will be rejected without
further consideration. Papers selection will be merit-based, with no a prio=
ri
limit on the number of accepted papers. Results must be unpublished and not
submitted for publication elsewhere, including the proceedings of other
symposia or workshops. The program chair must be informed, in advance of
submission, of any closely related work submitted or about to be submitted
to a conference or journal. Authors of accepted papers are expected to sign
copyright release forms. One author of each accepted paper is expected to
present it at the conference.


Short Presentations:
A session of short presentations, intended for descriptions of student
research, works in progress, and other brief communications, is planned.
These abstracts will not be published. Dates and guidelines will be
posted on the LICS website.


Kleene Award for Best Student Paper:
An award in honor of the late Stephen C. Kleene will be given
for the best student paper(s), as judged by the program committee.


Special Issues:
Full versions of up to three accepted papers, to be selected by the program
committee, will be invited for submission to the Journal of the ACM.
Additional selected papers will be invited to a special issue of Logical
Methods in Computer Science.


Sponsorship:
The symposium is sponsored by the IEEE Technical Committee on Mathematical
Foundations of Computing and by ACM SIGACT, in cooperation with the Associa=
tion
for Symbolic Logic and the European Association for Theoretical
Computer Science.


Program Chair:
Orna Kupferman, Hebrew University


Program Committee:
Parosh A. Abdulla, Uppsala University
Amal Ahmed, Northeastern Universtiy
Sergei Artemov, City University of New York
Andrei Bulatov, Simon Fraser University
Yijia Chen, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Veronique Cortier, CNRS, Loria
Mariangiola Dezani-Ciancaglini, Univ. di Torino
Thomas Ehrhard, CNRS, Universite Paris Diderot
Javier Esparza, Technische Universitaet Muenchen
Kousha Etessami, University of Edinburgh
Maribel Fernandez, King=92s College London
Santiago Figueira, University of Buenos Aires
Simon Gay, University of Glasgow
Martin Grohe, Humboldt-Universitaet zu Berlin
Martin Hofmann, LMU Munich
Petr Jancar, Technical University Ostrava
Barbara Jobstmann, CNRS, Verimag and Jasper DA
Patricia Johann, University of Strathclyde
Bakhadyr Khoussainov, The University of Auckland
Antonina Kolokolova, University of Newfoundland
Victor Marek, University of Kentucky
Angelo Morzenti, Politecnico di Milano
Lawrence Moss, Indiana University
Madhavan Mukund, Chennai Math. Institute
Anca Muscholl, Universite Bordeaux
Mogens Nielsen, Aarhus University
Catuscia Palamidessi, INRIA, Ecole Polytechnique
Luc Segoufin, INRIA, ENS Cachan
Natarajan Shankar, SRI International
Alexandra Silva, Radboud University Nijmegen
Balder ten Cate, UC Santa Cruz
Kazushige Terui, Kyoto University
Ron van der Meyden, Univ. of New South Wales
Jeannette M. Wing, Carnegie Mellon University
Nobuko Yoshida, Imperial College London


Conference Chair:
Mike Mislove, Tulane University


Workshop Chair:
Patricia Bouyer-Decitre, CNRS, ENS Cachan


Publicity Chair:
Andrzej Murawski, Univ. of Leicester


General Chair:
Luke Ong, University of Oxford


Organizing Committee:
Martin Abadi, Luca Aceto, Rajeev Alur, Franz Baader, Paul Beame,
Patricia Bouyer-Decitre, Adriana Compagnoni, Anuj Dawar, Nachum
Dershowitz, Martin Escardo, Maribel Fernandez, Martin Grohe, Orna
Grumberg, Jean-Pierre Jouannaud, Phokion Kolaitis, Orna Kupferman,
Benoit Larose, Vlatko Lipovac, Michael Mislove, Georg Moser, Andrzej
Murawski, Luke Ong (chair), Andre Scedrov, Philip Scott, David Shmoys,
Matt Valeriote


Advisory Board:
Martin Abadi, Samson Abramsky, Rajeev Alur, Bob Constable, Thierry
Coquand, Thomas Henzinger, Phokion Kolaitis, Dexter Kozen, Dale Miller,
John Mitchell, Prakash Panangaden, Andrew Pitts, Gordon Plotkin,
Moshe Vardi, Glynn Winskel


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

