Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Paul Taylor <pt09@PaulTaylor.EU>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Dedekind versus Cauchy reals
Date: Thu, 12 Feb 2009 12:54:07 +0000
Lines: 242
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1LXnWQ-0000bX-Fe@mailserv.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Paul Taylor <pt09@PaulTaylor.EU>
NNTP-Posting-Host: lo.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0 (Apple Message framework v624)
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCII; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1234493002 13594 80.91.229.12 (13 Feb 2009 02:43:22 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Fri, 13 Feb 2009 02:43:22 +0000 (UTC)
To: Categories list <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: categories@mta.ca Fri Feb 13 03:44:36 2009
Return-path: <categories@mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from mailserv.mta.ca ([138.73.1.1])
	by lo.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.50)
	id 1LXo2b-0006y1-Fb
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Fri, 13 Feb 2009 03:44:33 +0100
Original-Received: from Majordom by mailserv.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.61)
	(envelope-from <categories@mta.ca>)
	id 1LXnWQ-0000bX-Fe
	for categories-list@mta.ca; Thu, 12 Feb 2009 22:11:18 -0400
Original-Sender: categories@mta.ca
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:83
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/83>

I wanted to reply to what Toby Bartells and Thomas Streicher said
in response to my challenge to say why Cauchy sequences are often
preferred to Dedekind cuts as constructions of the real line.
However, I made the mistake of trying to read through the whole thread,
so I'm afraid this posting has ended up in a somewhat rambling state.
Also, I shall postpone the discussion of why DEDEKIND reals are
good for COMPUTATION to another posting.

NOTE TO ANYONE READING THIS IN AN ARCHIVE:

There have been numerous very interesting contributions to this thread
from Toby Bartels, Giovanni Curi, Peter Johnstone, Dusko Pavlovic,
Vaughan Pratt, Steve Stevenson and others, but many of them have been
posted under Subject: lines including the words
        Kantor dust
This is an excellent thread, though unfortunately on the wrong mailing
list.  But I know that Peter Schuster reads "categories", so maybe he
will chip in from the point of view of Bishop's constructive analysis.


Some quick answers to various people's questions first.

When I have spoken about "CONSTRUCTIONS" of the real line or of Cantor
space, I mean the word in the usual non-formal mathematical sense, not
according to any doctrine of constructivity.

Even in a particular system, I don't think it makes sense to say
whether the "construction" of a SPACE takes finite time.  We can ask
such questions (and, in more detail, about "complexity") for
computations of INTEGERS FROM INTEGERS.  Some people, in particular
some of those who take part in "Computability and Complexity in
Analysis", claim that this question is meaningful for REAL NUMBERS.
But for OBJECTS,  I don't see that it has any clear meaning.

Toby Bartels said that the "UNDERLYING-SET AXIOM" in ASD is
impredicative.
This is correct, but I introduced this axiom as a "straw man".
First, in order to say exactly what is needed to make ASD equivalent
to (locally compact locales over) an elementary topos.
Second, to make the point that a great deal of mainstream mathematics
is computable and does NOT require underlying sets.  I see the main
thread of ASD as being about a computable theory.



Toby has also said a lot of interesting things about many different
systems.  These illustrate my point that it is essential to state
which system, or which notion of "constructivity" you intend.

He has said, for example
* The Dedekind reals can also be constructed in CZF (Peter Aczel's
   predicative constructive set theory) even if you remove countable
   choice, using subset collection aka fullness.
* Similarly, if you remove identity types from intensional type theory
   (so breaking the justification of countable choice), you can still
   justify the fullness axiom and so construct the Dedekind reals
   (albeit not literally as sets of rational numbers).
* The Cauchy reals exist an a Pi-W-pretopos (equivalently, in a
   constructive set or type theory with exponentiation but no power
   sets or even fullness and with infinity but no countable choice).
* But the Dedekind reals, as far as [he] can tell, do not; excluded
   middle, power sets, fullness, or countable choice would each do the
   job, but you need ~something~.

I would challenge someone to consider the last of these questions
seriously, maybe taking a hint from the second.   ASD provides another,
as it uses lambda term over a special object instead of talking about
"sets" of rational numbers.

Peter Johnstone, on the other hand, has referred to the fact that both
constructions exist in the topos-theoretic context, and are in general
different.   I don't want to put words into Peter's mouth, but a lot of
evidence from "ordinary mathematics" says that the Dedekind reals are
preferable.

Giovanni Curi has also described the situation in several settings,
apparently coming down on the side of Dedekind.   (I am citing other
people's postings primarily in order to encourage readers to read
throught the thread.)



The reason why we need to be clear about the different systems is that
the mathematical results are DIFFERENT in them, in INTERESTING ways.
It is very easy to adopt the habit of taking a particular system as
given, and then asserting or denying that some theorem is
"constructive", as a judgement about the THEOREM.  However, they are
typically headline results from mainstream mathematics, so it is the
SYSTEM and not the theorem that is under scrutiny.

In particular, I would like to turn the tables on the predicativists.
A lot of excellent mathematics has been done in Martin-Lof type theory.
More recently, certain categorists have been inspired by this to study
"Pi-W-pretoposes" (which surely deserve a better name).
But these theories pick a few items from the (by Godel's theorem,
inexhaustible) collection of possible type-forming operations.

Two questions naturally arise:
* Why do you consider that the axioms that you have chosen are
legitimate?
* Why stop with them?

For example, the recent debate amongst various constructive
disciplines has shown that it is valuable to set down explicit rules
about WHICH JOINS one may legitimately form in the lattice of open
subspaces of a space:

* In locale theory, one can form "all" of them, or, from a more
   constructive point of view, "enough" of them to obtain right adjoints
   such as Heyting implication and the direct image f_*.

* In ASD, the indexing objects of legitimate joins are called OVERT.
   You can take this as a tautologous definition, in which case the
   notion of "overtness" is variable and might, for example, be extended
   by introducing ORACLES.

* In Formal Topology, the ability to form unions is governed by
   Martin-Lof Type Theory,  wherein the "sets" (over which we may
   form unions) are closed under implication.  (At least, I believe
   that this is the case - no doubt someone will correct me if not.)
   From a computational point of view, this is a questionable thing to
   do (hence my first question).

* Algebraic Set Theory has an axiomatisation based on the properties
   of OPEN MAPS.  The latter are the same as families of overt spaces,
   in the same way that proper maps are families of compact spaces.
   Various workers on AST have augmented these axioms, explicitly
   with the purpose of including different LOGICAL connectives.

So why not consider the TYPE OF DEDEKIND REALS too?

This is a perfectly serious suggestion,  and indeed it is precisely
what Andrej Bauer and I have been doing.   Dedekind completeness is
a rule for INTRODUCING real numbers, given pairs of predicates,
whilst the Heine--Borel theorem introduces quantified predicates.
See
       www.PaulTaylor.EU/ASD/analysis.html
for a summary of this SYNTACTIC theory, along with the papers that
develop it.

I intend to answer Thomas Streicher's "pragmatic" reasons for
computing with Cauchy sequences in a separate posting,  but I'd
like to pick out the "foundational" part here:

 > AC_N of course allows you to magically find a modulus of convergence
 > for every Cauchy sequence. But like Church's Thesis or Brouwer's
 > Theorem this is sort of a Deus ex machina (actually those are 2
 > contradictory dei ex machina!) and thus of moderate help for exact
 > computation on the reals.

(Do you see what I mean by "heresy"?)

The alleged conflict between Church's Thesis and Brouwer's Theorem
(I would prefer to say the Heine--Borel theorem) is in fact exactly the
point at which Andrej Bauer and I began our collaboration, in November
2004.  He asked me whether I believed both of these things, which I
said I did, and he progressively took me through the construction of
the Kleene Tree -- to the point of contradiction.

Of course, I wasn't going to accept that, so we back-tracked, and
in particular I set out what I meant by Church's thesis.  I think
this formulation is in Pino Rosolini's thesis,  and it is proved
for ASD in "Scott domains in ASD" (rejected by CTCS 2002).

There is a map p:N->Sigma^N that is "universal" in the (weak) sense
that, for any map f:N->Sigma^N, there is some (not necessarily unique)
fill-in  q:N->N  with  f=p.q:

                   >  N
                 .    |
               .      |p
            q.        |
           .          |
         .            V
       .       f      V
      N--------->  Sigma^N

I forget how the conversation with Andrej went on from that point,
but shortly afterwards he wrote down the Dedekind cut for the supremum
of a non-empty compact overt subspace of R. Our construction of R took
off from there.



This "conflict between Church's Thesis and Brouwer's Theorem"
illustrates another important principle about the methodology of
mathematics:

COUNTEREXAMPLES CLOSE MINDS

When someone demonstrates a counterexample, what they legitimately
prove is typically
           D, E, F  |-  not G.

Then they assert "not E", after which an entire discipline gets built
on the failure of E.   Cantor's theorem about the non-isomorphism of
a set with its powerset is perhaps the dominant example of this.

This is an "argument by authority", one of the principal fallacies of
logic.

For one thing, D, E, F and G play symmetrical roles in the argument,
so why pick on E as the erroneous assumption?

Eventually, some heretic comes along and points out that this proof
makes other assumptions A, B and C.  By substituting different ideas,
A', B' and C', they manage to show that these and D, E, F and G can
validly co-exist.  However, because of the pernicious influence of the
counterexample on other people's minds, it is very difficult for the
new ideas to get a hearing.


Finally, a footnote about CONWAY'S NUMBERS.

As Peter Johnstone has already pointed out, these include the ordinals.

However, the traditional theory of the ordinals depends VERY HEAVILY
on excluded middle.  The intuitionistic theory is therefore rather
complicated and, in particular, there are several different kinds of
intuitionistic ordinals, for which see
    "Intuitionistic Sets and Ordinals" by Paul Taylor, JSL 61 (1996).
    "Algebraic Set Theory" by Andre Joyal and Ieke Moerdijk,  CUP 1996?
and my web page www.PaulTaylor.EU/ordinals/.

This means that the intuitionistic version of Conway numbers would be
even more complicated, although Frank Rosemeier made a start in
    "A Constructive Approach to Conway's Theory of Games" in
    "Reuniting the Antipodes:  Constructive and Nonstandard Views
    of the Continuum}, Peter Schuster, Ulrich Berger and Horst Osswald
    (eds), Springer-Verlag, 2001.

There are further remarks on the interaction amongst Dedekind
completeness,
the Archimedean property and Conway's numbers at the end of section 12
of "The Dedekind reals in ASD".


Paul Taylor




