Path: news.gmane.org!not-for-mail
From: Thomas Wahl <wahl@ccs.neu.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD), 2015 - First Call for Papers
Date: Sun, 01 Mar 2015 18:05:44 -0500
Lines: 233
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1YSOkv-00041T-0F@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: Thomas Wahl <wahl@ccs.neu.edu>
NNTP-Posting-Host: plane.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Trace: ger.gmane.org 1425296700 13818 80.91.229.3 (2 Mar 2015 11:45:00 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@ger.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Mon, 2 Mar 2015 11:45:00 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Mon Mar 02 12:44:44 2015
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtp3.mta.ca ([138.73.1.127])
	by plane.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.69)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1YSOmA-0000Lv-57
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Mon, 02 Mar 2015 12:44:42 +0100
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:48351)
	by smtp3.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.80)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1YSOkw-0000QH-5J; Mon, 02 Mar 2015 07:43:26 -0400
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1YSOkv-00041T-0F
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Mon, 02 Mar 2015 07:43:25 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:8523
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/8523>

CALL FOR PAPERS

International Conference on
Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD)

Austin, Texas, USA, September 27-30, 2015

http://www.fmcad.org/FMCAD15

** Note: ** FMCAD 2015 will be held at the end of September,
             several weeks earlier than in previous years!


HIGHLIGHTS

FMCAD will be co-located with the SAT conference, and with the DIFTS and
ACL2 workshops. The conference program will include, in addition to regular
paper presentations, tutorials by Isil Dillig (UT Austin), Priyank Kalla
(Utah), and Andre Platzer (CMU), among others; new editions of the Hardware
Model Checking competition and the FMCAD Student Forum; an industrial panel
discussion; and keynote talks.

A small number of outstanding FMCAD submissions will be considered for
inclusion in a Special Issue of the journal on Formal Methods in System
Design.

FMCAD 2015 has technical co-sponsorship from the IEEE Council on Electronic
Design Automation, and in-cooperation status with ACM SIGPLAN (Special
Interest Group on Programming Languages) and ACM SIGSOFT (Special Interest
Group on Software Engineering).

IMPORTANT SUBMISSION DATES

Abstract Submission:    May  02,    2015
Paper Submission:       May  11,    2015
Author Response Period: June 15-19, 2015
Author Notification:    July 06,    2015
Camera-Ready Version:   July 31,    2015

IMPORTANT EVENT DATES

FMCAD Tutorial Day:    September 27,    2015 (joint with SAT and DIFTS)
FMCAD Regular Program: September 28-30, 2015

CO-LOCATED EVENTS

SAT conference: September 24-27, 2015
DIFTS workshop: September 26-27, 2015
ACL2 workshop:  October   01-02, 2015

CONFERENCE SCOPE AND PUBLICATION

FMCAD 2015 is the fifteenth in a series of conferences on the theory and
applications of formal methods in hardware and system verification. FMCAD
provides a leading forum to researchers in academia and industry for
presenting and discussing groundbreaking methods, technologies, theoretical
results, and tools for reasoning formally about computing systems. FMCAD
covers formal aspects of computer-aided system design including
verification, specification, synthesis, and testing.

FMCAD employs a rigorous peer-review process. Accepted papers are
distributed through both ACM and IEEE digital libraries. In addition,
published articles are made available freely on the conference page; the
authors retain the copyright. There are no publication fees. At least one
of the authors is required to register for the conference and present the
accepted paper. A small number of outstanding FMCAD submissions will be
considered for inclusion in a Special Issue of the journal on Formal
Methods in System Design.


TOPICS OF INTEREST

FMCAD welcomes submission of papers reporting original research on advances
in all aspects of formal methods technology and its application to
computer-aided design. Topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

-- Model checking, theorem proving, equivalence checking, abstraction and
    reduction, compositional methods, decision procedures at the bit- and
    word-level, probabilistic methods, combinations of deductive methods and
    decision procedures.

-- Synthesis and compilation for computer system descriptions, modeling,
    specification, and implementation languages, formal semantics of
    languages and their subsets, model-based design, design derivation and
    transformation, correct-by-construction methods.

-- Application of formal and semi-formal methods to functional and
    non-functional specification and validation of hardware and software,
    including timing and power modeling, verification of computing systems
    on all levels of abstraction, system-level design and verification for
    embedded and cyberphysical systems, hardware-software co-design and
    verification, transaction-level verification.

-- Experience with the application of formal and semi-formal methods to
    industrial-scale designs; tools that represent formal verification
    enablement, new features, or a substantial improvement in the automation
    of formal methods.

-- Application of formal methods in areas beyond computer systems,
    including formal methods describing processes studied in other areas of
    science, engineering, and humanities.



SUBMISSIONS

Submissions must be made electronically in PDF format through a link
that will be provided in due time on the FMCAD web site

http://fmcad.org/FMCAD15

Two categories of papers are invited: Regular papers, and Tool & Case Study
papers. Regular papers are expected to offer novel foundational ideas,
theoretical results, or algorithmic improvements to existing methods etc,
along with experimental impact validation where applicable. Tool & Case
Study papers are expected to report on the design, implementation or use of
verification (or related) technology in a practically relevant context
(which need not be industrial), and its impact on design processes.

Both Regular and Tool & Case study papers must use the IEEE Transactions
format on letter-size paper with a 10-point font size, and can be up to 8
pages in length (same page limit for both paper categories). Authors will
be required to select the appropriate paper category at abstract submission
time.

Submissions in both categories must contain original research that has not
been previously published, nor is concurrently submitted for publication.
Any partial overlap with published or concurrently submitted papers must be
clearly indicated. If experimental results are reported, authors are
strongly encouraged to provide adequate access to their data, at submission
time, so that results can be independently verified.



STUDENT FORUM

Continuing the tradition of the previous two years, FMCAD 2015 will host a
Student Forum that provides a platform for graduate students at any career
stage to introduce their research to the wider Formal Methods community,
and solicit feedback. Submissions for the event must be short reports
describing research ideas or ongoing work that the student is currently
pursuing, and must be within the scope of FMCAD. Work, part of which has
been previously published, will be considered; the novel aspect to be
addressed in future work must be clearly described in such cases. All
submissions will be reviewed by a select group of FMCAD program committee
members.

The event will consist of short presentations by the student authors of
each accepted submission, and of a poster that will be on display
throughout the duration of the conference. Accepted submissions will be
listed, with title and author name, in the event description in the
conference proceedings. The authors will also have the option to upload
their poster and presentation to the FMCAD web site. The best contribution
(determined by the committee based on the quality of the submission and the
presentation) will be given public recognition and a certificate at the
event.

Limited funds will be available for travel assistance for students with
accepted contributions.

More details are available at
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/FMCAD/FMCAD15/student-forum.shmtl

STUDENT FORUM DATES

Submission Deadline:     June 21, 2015
Acceptance Notification: July 19, 2015
Forum Date:              September 28-30, 2015


FMCAD ORGANIZING COMMITTEE

Program chairs:
Roope Kaivola, Intel
Thomas Wahl, Northeastern University

Publication Chair:
Ruzica Piskac, Yale University

Student Forum Chair:
Georg Weissenbacher, Vienna University of Technology

Tutorial Chairs:
Malay Ganai, Atrenta
Chao Wang, Virginia Tech

Local Arrangements Chair & Webmaster:
Shilpi Goel, The University of Texas at Austin

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

Domagoj Babic, Google
Armin Biere, Johannes Kepler University
Per Bjesse, Synopsys
Nikolaj Bjorner, Microsoft Research
Roberto Bruttomesso, Atrenta
Gianpiero Cabodi, Politecnico di Torino
Alessandro Cimatti, FBK-irst
Hana Chockler, King's College
Bruno Dutertre, SRI International
John Havlicek, Cadence Design Systems
Keijo Heljanko, Aalto University
Alan Hu, University of British Columbia
Roope Kaivola, Intel (co-chair)
Daniel Kroening, University of Oxford
Panagiotis Manolios, Northeastern University
Ken McMillan, Microsoft Research
Naren Narasimhan, Calypto
Lee Pike, Galois
Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
Sandip Ray, Intel
Philipp Ruemmer, Uppsala University
Andrey Rybalchenko, Microsoft Research
Julien Schmaltz, Eindhoven University of Technology
Natasha Sharygina, Universita' della Svizzera Italiana
Anna Slobodova, Centaur Technology
Niklas Sorensson, Chalmers University of Technology
Daryl Stewart, ARM
Murali Talupur, Intel Corporation
Helmut Veith, Vienna University of Technology
Thomas Wahl, Northeastern University (co-chair)
Georg Weissenbacher, Vienna University of Technology

STEERING COMMITTEE

Armin Biere, Johannes Kepler University in Linz, Austria
Alan Hu, University of British Columbia, Canada
Warren Hunt, University of Texas at Austin, USA



[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

