Path: news.gmane.org!.POSTED!not-for-mail
From: "Ernest G. Manes" <manes@mtdata.com>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Fred
Date: Mon, 4 Sep 2017 21:02:02 -0400
Lines: 103
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1dpF0I-0005Pj-3m@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: "Ernest G. Manes" <manes@mtdata.com>
NNTP-Posting-Host: blaine.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="UTF-8"
X-Trace: blaine.gmane.org 1504622424 13582 195.159.176.226 (5 Sep 2017 14:40:24 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@blaine.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Tue, 5 Sep 2017 14:40:24 +0000 (UTC)
To: "categories@mta.ca" <categories@mta.ca>
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Tue Sep 05 16:40:05 2017
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtp2.mta.ca ([198.164.44.40])
	by blaine.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.84_2)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1dpF1I-0002lO-TA
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Tue, 05 Sep 2017 16:40:05 +0200
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:57970)
	by smtp2.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.80)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1dpF1z-0005LD-DX; Tue, 05 Sep 2017 11:40:47 -0300
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1dpF0I-0005Pj-3m
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Tue, 05 Sep 2017 11:39:02 -0300
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:9324
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/9324>

September, 2017.

Fred E. J. Linton.  For most of the time I knew him, I kept secret what E.
and J. stand for, being of the impression that almost nobody knew and it
was not my place to tell.  I think it is OK to tell you now.  Ernest and
Julius.

Fred spent his whole teaching career at Wesleyan University in Middletown
Connecticut.  I entered the graduate program there in 1963-64, at the
tender age of 20.  I do not recall meeting Fred during that first year.

In my second year, I developed an interest in categories from my
coursework.  But Fred wasn't there.  He was visiting Mac Lane in Chicago.
By the end of the second semester, I knew I wanted to meet him.  By good
fortune, we both attended the NSF summer program (six weeks long!) in
homological algebra at Bowdoin College (principal lecturer Ernst Snapper of
Dartmouth).  We met right away, and immediately played tennis.  I have two
memories regarding Fred from this time.

(1)  Everybody ate lunch and dinner in the dining hall.  At one lunch, they
served chili.  In order to break up the crackers into small pieces, Fred
put the packet on the table and applied great force with his elbow.  The
second time, Alex Rosenberg held his ears.

(2)  As many of you have noticed, Fred often napped in between talks at a
conference.  Perhaps you took this as a sign of age.  Not so.  Fred always
did this.  At the Bowdoin conference 52 years ago, there was also a music
camp with many prominent musicians in residence.  Two violinists came over
to Fred, asleep on a chair in the lounge, and played Brahm's Lullibye.  It
didn't wake him up.

In Middletown, Fred was very active in folk dancing.  His group was very
professional and gave quite astounding performances at local venues.  This
was a major interest in his life.

In 1966, we arranged with Wesleyan that I could follow Fred to Zurich in
order to attempt to write a thesis.  About a week before we were to leave,
I asked him about the research focus of the group of category theorists
visiting the ETH.  He simply replied "triples" with no further
explanation.  I wondered what on Earth I was getting into.

Fred often began a conversation with word play, even if he hadn't seen you
for years.  His puns drew on English, German, French and Italian.  Once
when the two of us were trying to negotiate downtown San Juan (at one of
Jon Beck's conferences) with neither of us knowing Spanish, he asked for
information in Italian; he got strange looks, but it seemed to work.  I'm
not sure how I settled on "A Triple Miscellany" for a thesis title, but
Fred preferred several variants.  His favorite was "A Missal tripleary".
As recently as a few months ago in Schenectady, Fred chided me for not
using ..Missal...

Beginning 1969-1970, Fred and I joined a lively group of category theorists
for postdocs at Dalhousie University.   The one shortcoming for Fred was
the lack of a good folk dancing group, so he started one for amateurs.  He
somehow convinced my wife and I to join.  We had fun, but I never learned
the Miserlou.
Recently I mentioned the names of one or two  from that group to Fred.  He
had kept up with them.

  I am a graduate of Los Angeles High School and so I grew up steeped in the
culture of fixing cars.   Fred turned to me for advice on various car
problems.  One time, his engine just wouldn't start and he asked for help.
There was no fuel coming through to the carburetor.  Now any California kid
knows that either the fuel pump was shot (usually the problem) or the fuel
line to the pump was clogged (unlikely).  To eliminate the second case, I
explained to Fred that if he removed the fuel cap and blew into the tank, I
could watch the fuel line (which I had removed from the fuel pump) to see
if gasoline was coming out.  As it turns out, the fuel line was indeed
plugged.  As a result the back pressure sprayed gasoline in Fred's eye and
he had to visit the emergency room.

Fred was a very kind person and often would expend considerable effort to
do something good for somebody else.  It was his style not to end up  in a
situation where plans he had promised did not materialize.  When he
attempted to do things for me, the first I heard about it was when it
happened.  As an example, I had mentioned to him early on that the Wesleyan
stipend might be difficult to live on in Switzerland.  He said nothing.
After attending the first lecture (very memorable for me --Jon Beck had
defined what a triple is), and after the tea and cookies that followed,
Fred told me to follow him.  We were joined by a gentleman I didn't know.
He and Fred spoke in German and it was more complicated than I could
follow.  Then we proceeded to walk for ten minutes in a basement labyrinth
that equaled any in a big city hospital, eventually coming to a very dark
alcove with a small "cage".  The first gentleman spoke at some length with
the gentleman inside the cage; this was in Swiss German which neither Fred
nor I could follow.  Eventually a piece of paper was produced which I was
asked to sign.  They then put in my hand the biggest pile of cash I have
ever personally held in this life.  It was enough for my wife and I to eat
on for the balance of the year.  (Of course, Beno Eckmann gets credit for
that too).

My mathematical career was jump-started by the fact that Saunders Mac Lane
convened a seminar at Chicago based on my thesis, only four months after it
became clear I would finish.  I realize now that Fred must have played a
substantial role in making this happen.

Damn!  I miss him.

       Ernie Manes


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

