Path: news.gmane.org!.POSTED!not-for-mail
From: "Lawvere, F." <wlawvere@buffalo.edu>
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: Myles Tierney
Date: Wed, 18 Oct 2017 12:30:37 -0300
Lines: 143
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1e4s1E-0006lL-RL@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: "Lawvere, F." <wlawvere@buffalo.edu>
NNTP-Posting-Host: blaine.gmane.org
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=UTF-8; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: QUOTED-PRINTABLE
X-Trace: blaine.gmane.org 1508347379 27321 195.159.176.226 (18 Oct 2017 17:22:59 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@blaine.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 18 Oct 2017 17:22:59 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Wed Oct 18 19:22:53 2017
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtp2.mta.ca ([198.164.44.40])
	by blaine.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.84_2)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1e4s2x-0003KC-9I
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Wed, 18 Oct 2017 19:22:23 +0200
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:52227)
	by smtp2.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.80)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1e4s2q-0005W3-CN; Wed, 18 Oct 2017 14:22:16 -0300
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1e4s1E-0006lL-RL
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Wed, 18 Oct 2017 14:20:36 -0300
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:9391
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/9391>

Dear Friends and Colleagues,

I am deeply sad about the loss of Myles, my friend and a pillar of the 
community surrounding Eilenberg and Mac Lane. I highly respected him as a 
creative collaborator. Whenever we met at meetings, or spoke on the phone, 
even if we had not seen each other for a long time, we knew each others 
way of thinking.

Thanks to Andre Joyal for his obituary and the wealth of information
about the work of Myles Tierney. I elaborate below on our collaboration.

Myles and I had independently recognized the need for an axiomatic theory 
of sheaves and related matters, and at a gathering in Albrecht Dolds house 
near Heidelberg, we agreed to collaborate on the construction of such a 
theory during our upcoming stay at Dalhousie University. (Myles had agreed 
to join our group of researchers for a year.) Already in the first days of 
our seminar Myles made important advances, such as formulating the axioms 
of exactness which we knew would have to be theorems of a correct theory 
of topos.

He emphasized in general that Grothendieck had made the category (rather 
than the space) the central aspect that we should explicitly axiomatize. 
We had a pre-publication copy of SGA4 that we consulted frequently. In 
that work there was a significant advance over previous formulations of 
the sheaf condition: In a pre-sheaf topos, a covering specified by a 
Grothendieck topology, was no longer an infinite family of subobjects, but 
a single subobject R, (which of course might be imagined to arise as the 
union of a family); this made possible the formulation of notions in 
finitary terms, indeed in terms of a single operator whose properties 
Myles made precise. (Some people object to calling such operators 
topologies; the same objection applies to Grothendiecks use of the term 
topologies for his equivalent notion, which is of course also not 
literally a topology in the classical sense. Later we referred to such an 
operator as a localness operator, as a modal operator it is locally the 
case that, or as a Tierney closure operator which - as I pointed out to 
Kuratowski on his visit to Dalhousie - is not a Kuratowski closure 
operator since it preserves intersections, rather than unions. Similar 
operators arise in other parts of mathematics where they are sometimes 
called 'nuclei'.)

Another unique feature of SGA4 is that it contains no definition of topos; 
indeed every rigorous mention is of U-topos. This parameter U was 
essentially a model of set theory, and previous work on the category of 
sets showed clearly that for mathematical purposes, the use of composition 
of mappings is more effective than towers of membership. Thus Myles and I 
decided to replace U itself by an arbitrary topos (in our determination of 
that term), and indeed a general U-topos E could now be seen as structured 
by a morphism E --> U. This provided a suitable codomain for the 2-functor 
from internal U-sites to U-toposes, whose image consisted of those E which 
contain a bound in U. That, our fundamental preliminary goal, was proved 
in his thesis by the remarkable student of Myles, the late Radu 
Diaconescu.

We also had available a preliminary version of Monique Hakims thesis 
applying Grothendieck's notion of classifier topos to parameterized 
complex analysis.  This notion can be seen as a key step of Model Theory, 
except that the use of conjunction and disjunction and existential 
quantification is replaced by Grothendieck's direct recognition of which 
classes of structures are defined in terms of finite limits and small 
colimits. Of course, a logician will expect or want primitive predicates 
and basic axioms to present such notions of structure, and to facilitate 
such recognition. Our initial work to make explicit such a notion of 
theory-presentation was carried out by several people. It became evident 
that such a construction does not work for general elementary theories, 
because the negative operations of universal quantification and 
implication are not preserved by the geometrical morphisms of toposes, 
even though these operations are well-defined and exist within each 
particular topos. (Restricting to open geometric morphisms or to positive 
presentations can partly circumvent this limitation.) The positive 
presentations need to use the classical idea of sequent, rather than the 
mere specification of a class of formulas that aim to be true.

The classifier toposes are useful for mathematical questions other than 
logical ones, for example in combinatorial topology, as first pointed out 
in detail by Andre Joyal. The relation between combinatorial schemes and 
the spaces they generate is an adjoint functor. Specifically, any 
structure carried by a unit interval or by other basic space in a topos of 
spaces gives rise to the adjoint between the topos of spaces itself and 
the classifying topos for such structures, for example, distributive 
lattice, Boolean algebra, total ordering. Myles foresaw such clarifying 
applications, and in many other ways his knowledge of topology 
supplemented my own background.

A useful construction made explicit by Myles is still not widely 
recognized: the category of co-algebras for a given left-exact comonad in 
a given topos, is indeed another topos. This can be seen as an essential 
step in the construction of a pre-sheaf topos.

A significant advance in the world of logic was the result of Diaconescu, 
showing that the axiom of choice implies Boolean logic. His professor 
Myles Tierney had proved the independence of the continuum hypothesis, 
making essential use of the notion of sheaf. (LNM 274*). It was in 
preparing his talks for our seminar 1969-1970 that Myles formulated most 
of the logic needed for that result. Sabah Fakir who took part in these 
seminars sent notes each week to Jean Benabou who also gave a seminar 
simultaneously. Anders Kock was a very active participant, whose later 
Aarhus seminar with Gavin Wraith also contributed to the rapid 
dissemination of the results and the general point of view.

After I had presented our results at the 1970 ICM, we organized an
international meeting in January 1971; Myles returned from Rutgers to
Halifax to explain the continuum hypothesis to the 70 participants.

Myles and I were gratified in the ensuing months and years to see that our
general point of view was taken up by many mathematicians and logicians.
Further applications, for example the role of Boolean sheaves in algebraic
geometry, still await detailed publication. Several works by Michael Barr
intiated such applications.

In 1974 Myles Tierney and Alex Heller organized a meeting in New York City 
in honor of Samuel Eilenbergs 60th birthday; they edited the proceedings 
as Algebra, Topology, and Category Theory**. That book contains an 
influential article by Myles on the construction of classifier toposes for 
internal sites. Myles Tierney, Fred Linton, Jon Beck and I were roughly 
the same age when we started our studies at Columbia University; Mike 
Barr, Peter Freyd, John Gray, and Barry Mitchell were senior to us, and 
collaborated with us too. Sammy had attracted a group, all of whom 
continued to contribute to category theory.

In the ensuing years Myles organized a regular seminar in New York on 
weekends. It was attended by categorists from several states. I attended 
the seminar frequently from Buffalo, and I took along several students 
including Kimmo Rosenthal and Phil Mulry. Thanks to the generosity of 
Myles and Hanne, everybody was invited to sleep on the floor of their 
loft.

When I last spoke with Myles on the phone just a few months ago he 
explained to me the specific topological intuition underlying the notion 
of Kan complex.

I know that Myles would have joined me in welcoming any future mathematics 
on the horizon for which our work might have provided a stepping stone.

Bill Lawvere

  * Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and Logic. LNM 274, Springer 1972

** Algebra, Topology, and Category Theory, Academic Press, 1976



[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

