Path: news.gmane.org!.POSTED!not-for-mail
From: einarj@ifi.uio.no (Einar Broch Johnsen)
Newsgroups: gmane.science.mathematics.categories
Subject: 2nd CfP: FM 2018
Date: Wed, 29 Nov 2017 12:48:07 +0100
Lines: 135
Approved: news@gmane.org
Message-ID: <E1eK3CR-0008Tg-3z@mlist.mta.ca>
Reply-To: einarj@ifi.uio.no (Einar Broch Johnsen)
NNTP-Posting-Host: blaine.gmane.org
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
X-Trace: blaine.gmane.org 1511965188 7507 195.159.176.226 (29 Nov 2017 14:19:48 GMT)
X-Complaints-To: usenet@blaine.gmane.org
NNTP-Posting-Date: Wed, 29 Nov 2017 14:19:48 +0000 (UTC)
To: categories@mta.ca
Original-X-From: majordomo@mlist.mta.ca Wed Nov 29 15:19:43 2017
Return-path: <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>
Envelope-to: gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org
Original-Received: from smtp2.mta.ca ([198.164.44.40])
	by blaine.gmane.org with esmtp (Exim 4.84_2)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1eK3DD-0001ah-5u
	for gsmc-categories@m.gmane.org; Wed, 29 Nov 2017 15:19:43 +0100
Original-Received: from mlist.mta.ca ([138.73.1.63]:37364)
	by smtp2.mta.ca with esmtp (Exim 4.80)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1eK3Dt-0002n0-QM; Wed, 29 Nov 2017 10:20:25 -0400
Original-Received: from majordomo by mlist.mta.ca with local (Exim 4.71)
	(envelope-from <majordomo@mlist.mta.ca>)
	id 1eK3CR-0008Tg-3z
	for categories-list@mlist.mta.ca; Wed, 29 Nov 2017 10:18:55 -0400
Precedence: bulk
Xref: news.gmane.org gmane.science.mathematics.categories:9450
Archived-At: <http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.science.mathematics.categories/9450>

FM 2018: 22nd International Symposium on Formal Methods
Oxford, UK, July 15-17, 2018

Conference website		http://fm2018.org
Submission link			https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=fm2018
Abstract registration deadline	January 8, 2018
Submission deadline   		January 22, 2018
Notification 	    			April 9, 2018
Camera Ready 	   		May 9, 2018


Call for Papers - Main Conference

FM 2018 is the latest in a series of symposia organized by Formal Methods Europe, an independent association that encourages the use of, and research on, formal methods for the engineering of computer-based systems and software. The symposia have been notably successful in bringing together researchers and industrial users around a programme of original papers on research and industrial experience, workshops, tutorials, reports on tools, projects, and ongoing doctoral work. FM 2018 will take place in Oxford, UK, 15-17 July 2018 as part of FLoC 2018, the Federated Logic Conferences.

FM 2018 will highlight the development and application of formal methods in a wide range of domains including software and integrated computer-based systems. In the latter field, cyber-physical systems, systems-of-systems, human-computer interaction, manufacturing, sustainability, power, transport, cities, healthcare, and biology are of particular interest. We also welcome papers on experiences of formal methods in industry, and on the design and validation of formal methods tools.

Submission Guidelines

FM 2018 encourages submissions on formal methods for developing and evaluating systems that interact with physical processes, and systems that use artificial intelligence technology. Examples include autonomous systems, robots, and cyber-physical systems in general. Applying formal methods to these systems of growing interest and importance is challenging because they exhibit much greater non-determinism than traditional systems, making them challenging to assure. All papers must be original and not simultaneously submitted to another journal or conference.

The broad topics of interest for FM 2018 include, but are not limited to:
* Interdisciplinary formal methods: Techniques, tools and experiences demonstrating formal methods in  interdisciplinary frameworks.
* Formal methods in practice: Industrial applications of formal methods, experience with formal methods in industry, tool usage reports, experiments with challenge problems. Authors are encouraged to explain how formal methods overcame problems, led to improved designs, or provided new insights.
* Tools for formal methods: Advances in automated verification, model-checking, and testing with formal methods, tools integration, environments for formal methods, and experimental validation of tools. Authors are encouraged to demonstrate empirically that the new tool or environment advances the state of the art.
* Role of formal methods in software and systems engineering: Development processes with formal methods, usage guidelines for formal methods, and method integration. Authors are encouraged to evaluate process innovations with respect to qualitative or quantitative improvements. Empirical studies and evaluations are also solicited.
* Theoretical foundations: All aspects of theory related to specification, verification, refinement, and static and dynamic analysis. Authors are encouraged to explain how their results contribute to the solution of practical problems with methods or tools.

Submission Information

Papers should be original work, not published or submitted elsewhere, in Springer LNCS format, written in English, submitted through Easychair (https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=fm2018).

Each paper will be evaluated by at least three members of the Programme Committee. Authors of papers reporting experimental work are strongly encouraged to make their experimental results available for use by reviewers. Similarly, case study papers should describe significant case studies, and the complete development should be made available at the time of review. The usual criteria for novelty, reproducibility, correctness and the ability for others to build upon the described work apply. Tool papers should explain enhancements made compared to previously published work. A tool paper need not present the theory behind the tool but should focus on the tool's features, how it is used, its evaluation, and examples and screen shots illustrating the tool's use. Authors of tool papers should m
 ake their tool available for use by reviewers.

We solicit two categories of papers:
* Regular Papers should not exceed 15 pages, not counting references and appendices.
* Short papers, including tool papers, should not exceed 6 pages, not counting references and appendices. Besides tool papers, short papers are encouraged for any subject that can be described within the page limit, and in particular for novel ideas without an extensive experimental evaluation. Short papers will be accompanied by short presentations.

For regular and tool papers, an appendix can provide additional material such as details on proofs or experiments. The appendix is not part of the page count and not guaranteed to be read or taken into account by the reviewers. It should not contain information necessary to the understanding and the evaluation of the presented work. Papers will be accepted or rejected in the category in which they were submitted ??? there will be no "demotions" from a regular to a short paper.

Keynote Speakers

Annabelle McIver, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
Leonardo de Moura, Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA
Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Aalborg University & UP4ALL, Denmark

Best Paper Award

During the conference, the Programme Committee Chairs will present an award to the authors of the submission selected as the FM 2018 Best Paper.

Publication

Accepted papers will be published in the Symposium Proceedings to appear in Springer's Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Extended versions of selected papers will be invited for publication in a special issue of one or more journals.
Location

FM2018, the 22nd International Symposium on Formal Methods, will take place in Oxford, UK, 15-17 July 2018 as part of FLoC 2018, the Federated Logic Conferences.

General Chair

Erik P. de Vink, Eindhoven University of Technology, NL

Programme Chairs

Bill W. Roscoe, University of Oxford, GB
Jan Peleska, University of Bremen, DE

Committees

Program Committee

Bernhard K. Airchernig, TU Graz, AT
Joerg Brauer, Verified Systems International GmbH, DE
Ana Cavalcanti, University of York, GB
Frank De Boer, CWI, NL
John S. Fitzgerald, Newcastle University, GB
Martin Fraenzle, Universitaet Oldenburg, DE
Vijay Ganesh, University of Waterloo, CA
Diego Garbervetsky, Universidad de Buenos Aires, AR
Dimitria Giannakopoulou, NASA Ames, US
Thomas Gibson-Robinson, University of Oxford, GB
Stefania Gnesi, ISTI-CNR, IT
Anne E. Haxthausen, Technical University of Denmark, DK
Ian J. Hayes, University of Queensland, AU
Constance Heitmeyer, Naval Research Laboratory, US
Jozef Hooman, TNO-ESI and Radboud University Nijmegen, NL
Laura Humphrey, Air Force Research Laboratory, US
Fuyuki Ishikawa, National Institute of Informatics, JP
Einar Broch Johnsen, University of Oslo, NO
Cliff Jones, Newcastle University, GB
Joost-Pieter Katoen, RWTH Aachen University, DE
Gerwin Klein, NICTA and University of New South Wales, AU
Laura Kovacs, Chalmers University of Technology, SE
Peter Gorm Larsen, Aarhus University, DK
Yves Ledru, Universit?? Grenoble Alpes, FR
Rustan Leino, Microsoft Research, US
Elizabeth Leonard, Naval Research Laboratory, US
Martin Leucker, University of L??beck, DE
Michael Leuschel, University of D??sseldorf, DE
Zhiming Liu, Southwest University, CN
Tiziana Margaria, University of Limerick and Lero, IE
Mieke Massink, CNR-ISTI, IT
Annabelle McIver, Macquarie University, AU
Dominique Mery, LORIA and Universit?? de Lorraine, FR
Mohammad Reza Mousavi, Halmstad University, SE
Peter M??ller, ETH Z??rich, CH
Colin O'Halloran, D-RisQ Software Systems, GB
Jose Oliveira, Universidade do Minho, PT
Olaf Owe, Universitity of Oslo, NO
Sam Owre, SRI International, US
Alexandre Petrenko, CRIM, CA
Anna Philippou, University of Cyprus, CY
Elvinia Riccobene, University of Milan, IT
Grigore Rosu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, US
Augusto Sampaio, Federal University of Pernambuco, BR
Gerardo Schneider, Chalmers University of Gothenburg, SE
Natasha Sharygina, University of Lugano, CH
Ana Sokolova, University of Salzburg, AT
Jun Sun, Singapore University of Technology and Design, SG
Stefano Tonetta, FBK-irst, IT
Farn Wang, National Tainwan University, TW
Heike Wehrheim, University of Paderborn, DE
Michael Whalen, University of Minnesota, US
Jim Woodcock, University of York, GB
H??sn?? Yenig??n, Sabanci University, TR
Fatiha Zaidi, Universit?? Paris-Sud, FR
Gianluigi Zavattaro, Universita di Bologna, IT

Contact

All questions about submissions should be emailed to the programme chairs.


[For admin and other information see: http://www.mta.ca/~cat-dist/ ]

